A Survey on State-of-the-art Deep Learning
Applications and Challenges

arXiv:2403.17561v5 [cs.LG] 15 Nov 2024

Mohd Halim Mohd Noora,∗, Ayokunle Olalekan Igeb
a

School of Computer Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Jalan
Universiti, Gelugor, 11800, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia
b
Department of Computer Science, Adekunle Ajasin University, Ikare Akoko-Ipeme
Rd, Akungba-Akoko, P.M.B 001, Ondo State, Nigeria

Abstract
Deep learning, a branch of artificial intelligence, is a data-driven method
that uses multiple layers of interconnected units (neurons) to learn intricate
patterns and representations directly from raw input data. Empowered by
this learning capability, it has become a powerful tool for solving complex
problems and is the core driver of many groundbreaking technologies and
innovations. Building a deep learning model is challenging due to the algorithm’s complexity and the dynamic nature of real-world problems. Several
studies have reviewed deep learning concepts and applications. However, the
studies mostly focused on the types of deep learning models and convolutional neural network architectures, offering limited coverage of the stateof-the-art deep learning models and their applications in solving complex
problems across different domains. Therefore, motivated by the limitations,
this study aims to comprehensively review the state-of-the-art deep learning
models in computer vision, natural language processing, time series analysis
and pervasive computing. We highlight the key features of the models and
their effectiveness in solving the problems within each domain. Furthermore,
this study presents the fundamentals of deep learning, various deep learning
model types and prominent convolutional neural network architectures. Finally, challenges and future directions in deep learning research are discussed
to offer a broader perspective for future researchers.
∗

Corresponding author
Email addresses: halimnoor@usm.my (Mohd Halim Mohd Noor ),
ayo.ige@aaua.edu.ng (Ayokunle Olalekan Ige)

Preprint submitted to Neurocomputing

November 18, 2024

Keywords:
Deep Learning, Fundamentals, State-of-the-art Applications, Challenges
1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized many applications across a variety of
industries and research. The application of deep learning can be found in
healthcare [1], smart manufacturing [2], robotics [3], cybersecurity [4] etc.,
solving challenging and complex problems such as disease diagnosis, anomaly
detection, object detection and malware attack detection. Deep learning is
a subset of machine learning that focuses on learning from data using artificial neural networks with many layers, known as deep neural networks. An
artificial neural network is a computational model that imitates the working
principles of a human brain. The computational models are composed of
an input layer which receives the input data, multiple processing layers that
learn the representation of data and the output layer which produces the
output of the model.
Prior to the reintroduction of deep learning (DL) into the research trend,
pattern recognition tasks involved a transformation of the raw input data
such as pixel values of an image into a feature vector that represents the
internal representation of the data. The feature vector can be used by a machine learning model to detect or classify patterns in the data. This process
requires feature engineering and considerable domain knowledge to design a
suitable feature representation. With deep learning, this cumbersome process can be performed automatically whereby at each processing layer known
as hidden layers, the internal representation of the input data is learned or
extracted in a hierarchical manner. The first layer learns the presence of basic primitive features such as edges, dots, lines etc. The second layer learns
patterns or motifs by recognizing the combinations of the edges, dots and
lines, and the subsequent layers combine the motifs to produce more sophisticated features that correspond to the input data. This feature learning
process takes place in the sequence of hidden layers until the prediction is
finally produced.
Several studies have been conducted to discuss the concept and application of deep learning in the last few years, as listed in Table 1. The studies
addressed or focused on several aspects of deep learning, such as types of
deep learning models, learning approaches and strategies, convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures, deep learning applications and challenges.
2

In [5], the authors provided fundamentals of deep learning and highlighted
different types of deep learning models, such as convolutional neural networks, autoencoder and generative adversarial networks. Then, the applications of deep learning in various domains are discussed, and some challenges
associated with deep learning applications are presented. Another survey [6]
provided a comprehensive analysis of supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning approaches and compared the different learning strategies such
as online, federated and transfer learning. Finally, the current challenges of
deep learning and future direction are discussed.
In [7], the authors provided a comprehensive review of the popular CNN
architectures used in computer vision tasks, highlighting their key features
and advantages. Then, the applications of deep learning in medical imaging
and the challenges are discussed. A similar survey is reported in [8], where
the different supervised and unsupervised deep learning models are highlighted, and the popular CNN architectures are compared and discussed. In
another survey [9], the authors focused on the applications of deep learning
in computer vision, natural language processing and speech and audio processing. The different types of deep learning models are also discussed. In
[10], the authors focused on the different types of deep learning models and
provided a summary of deep learning applications in various domains.
Despite the existing surveys on deep learning that offer valuable insights,
the increasing amount of deep learning applications and the existing limitations in the current studies motivated us to explore this topic in depth.
In general, to the best of our knowledge, no survey paper focuses on the
emerging trends in state-of-the-art applications and the current challenges
associated with deep learning. Furthermore, the surveys do not discuss the
issues and how deep learning addresses them by highlighting the key features
and components in the models. Also, most surveys either ignore or provide
minimal coverage of the fundamentals of deep learning, which is crucial for
understanding the state-of-the-art models. The main objective of this paper is to present the most important aspects of deep learning, making it
accessible to a wide audience and facilitating researchers and practitioners
in advancing and leveraging its capabilities to solve complex problems across
diverse domains. Specifically, we present the fundamentals of deep learning and the various types of deep learning models, including popular deep
learning architectures. Then, we discuss the progress of deep learning in
state-of-the-art applications, highlighting the key features of the models and
their problem-solving approaches. Finally, we discuss the challenges faced by
3

Table 1: Summary of related works.

Reference
Focus
[5]
A short review of the fundamentals
of DL networks and discusses different types of neural networks, DL applications and challenges.
[6]
Discusses the learning approaches
(supervised,
unsupervised and
reinforcement learnings), learning
strategies, and DL challenges
[7]
Discusses different types of DL networks, CNN fundamentals and architectures, DL challenges and medical imaging applications
[8]
A short review of the fundamentals
of neural networks and discusses different types of DL networks, CNN
architectures and applications.
[9]
Discusses different types of DL networks and DL applications and challenges
[10]
Discusses different types of DL networks and provides a summary of
DL applications

Concepts not covered
Lack of analysis of CNN architectures and limited coverage of deep
learning fundamentals.
Lack of fundamentals of deep learning, CNN architectures and DL applications.
Limited discussion on DL applications such as natural language processing and time series analysis.
Limited discussion on DL applications and no discussion of DL challenges.
Lack of analysis of CNN architectures and limited coverage of deep
learning fundamentals.
Lack of fundamentals of deep learning, analysis of CNN architectures
and limited discussion on DL applications.

deep learning and the future research directions.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes
the fundamentals of deep learning which includes layers and attention mechanisms, activation functions, model optimization and loss functions, and regularization methods. Section 3 presents the types of deep learning models,
including the CNN architectures. Section 4 discusses the state-of-the-art applications of deep learning. Section 5 discusses the challenges and future
directions in the field of deep learning. The conclusion is given in Section 6.
4

2. Fundamentals of Deep Learning
This section describes the fundamental concepts such as layer types, activation functions, training algorithms and regularization methods to provide
a comprehensive understanding of the underlying principles in advancing the
field of deep learning.
2.1. Layers
A deep learning model is characterized by having numerous hidden layers. The hidden layers are responsible for learning and extracting complex
features from the input data. A hidden layer is composed of an arbitrary
number of neurons which serves as the fundamental building block of a neural network as shown in Fig. 1. A neuron consists of an arbitrary number of
inputs, each associated with a weight, which controls the flow of information
into the neuron during the forward pass. The flow of information, or forward
pass, involves the computation of summation of the weighted input, followed
by the application of a transformation function to the weighted sum. Let
x = x1 , x2 , ..., xd , j = 0, 1, ..., d be the input vector with d dimensions and wil
denotes the weights that are connected to neuron i in layer l. The forward
pass to neuron i in layer l is defined as
zil = wil · x =

d
X

l
wi,j
· xj

(1)

j=0

ali = g(zil )

(2)

l
where xj is the input vector of size d, wi,j
is the weight associated with
xj , connecting the input to neuron i at layer l, and g is the transformation
function also known as activation function. It is worth noting that w0 is
called bias and x0 = 1. A hidden layer wherein each neuron is connected
to all neurons of the previous layer is known as fully-connected layer. The
forward pass computation of a neuron ali in layer l receiving a set of input
from layer l − 1 can be generalized as follows:
d
X
l
l
l−1
ali = g(
wi,j
· al−1
j ) = wi · a
j=0

where al−1 is the input vector from layer l − 1.

5

(3)

Figure 1: A graphical representation of a neuron.

Another crucial layer type is the convolutional layer, which is primarily used for processing data that has underlying structures, such as spatial
patterns in image data or temporal patterns in time series data. Unlike fullyconnected layer, each neuron in a convolutional layer is connected only to
a subset of neurons in the previous layer as shown in Fig. 2. As shown
in the figure, each neuron in the hidden layer is connected only to a local
region, a subset of nine input neurons, and the weights are shared across the
input data. The weight-sharing not only significantly reduces the number of
parameters of the neural network, but also allows the network to learn the
same features across different spatial locations in the input [11]. Let x be
a two-dimensional input data with H × W × C such as a grayscale image,
where H is the height, W is the width and C is the channel of the image
data. The computation of a neuron in convolutional layer l is defined as
l
zi,j,d
=

k1 X
k2
X

l
wm,n,d
· xi·s+m,j·s+n,d

(4)

m=0 n=0
l
ali,j,d = g(zi,j,d
)

(5)

where wm,n,d is the weight connecting the input data xi,j,d within the window
to the neuron in layer l and s is the stride or the step size of the window as
it moves across the input data. This convolution operation where the filter
is represented by wm,n,d slides over the input data xi,j,d , producing a set of
output values called feature map.
6

Figure 2: A neuron is connected to a local region of the input data.

Pooling layers are commonly applied after successive convolutional layers
to progressively reduce the spatial dimensions of the feature maps. The
spatial reduction is performed by computing the summary of a subset of the
feature values in the feature maps as shown in Fig. 3. The pooling operation,
as shown in the figure, can use either the maximum or average method with
a pooling size of 2×2 applied across the entire feature map, thereby reducing
the size of the feature map. In addition to spatial reduction, pooling layers
decrease the number of parameters and provide translation-invariant features
[11]. Let al denotes feature map (hidden layer) l, a pooling operation with a
pooling size of m × n is defined as
al+1 = pool(ali·s+m,j·s+n )

(6)

where pool is either maximum or average function and s is the stride or step
size of the window as it moves across the feature map.
2.2. Attention Mechanisms
One of the important concepts in pattern recognition is the ability to attend and neglect certain parts of the input data based on their importance.
This is because not all parts of the input hold equal importance for making the prediction. Certain features exhibit a stronger correlation with the
output while others are less relevant. In convolutional layers, all extracted
features are treated uniformly, without consideration of the varying degree
7

Figure 3: Summaries of the feature map using maximum or average pooling to produce a
reduced feature map.

of the importance of the different parts of the input data. This limitation
is addressed by the introduction of attention mechanism, which can dynamically assign varying levels of significance (weights) to the different features.
This flexibility enables the deep learning models to prioritize the more relevant aspects of the input data, enhancing its ability to capture the intricate
dependencies for accurate prediction. Given an input data x, the process of
attending to the important components of the input is given as
A = f (g(x), x)

(7)

where g is a composite function that performs a sequence of operations to
generate the attention or the weights and f applies the generated attention
g(x) on the input x.
For instance, the squeeze-and-excitation (SE) attention generates the attention through five consecutive operations [12]. First, the input is vectorized
using global average pooling. Then the vector is passed to two fully-connected
layers, where the first one with ReLU activation and the second one with
sigmoid activation. SE attention was a pioneer in channel attention. The
attention module assigns varying weights to the channels of the feature maps.
SE attention suffers from computational cost and the use of global average
which may cause information loss at the spatial level. Several efforts have
been made to improve SE attention. Global Second-order Pooling (GSoP)
attention performs 1 × 1 convolution on the feature maps to reduce the num8

ber of channels, and then computes the pairwise channel correlation which
is used to generate the weights [13]. Efficient Channel Attention (ECA) replaced the fully-connected layers with 1d convolution to reduce the number
of parameters and the computational cost [14].
Temporal attention is an attention module that focuses on specific time
steps in a sequence of data such time series and video (sequence of images).
In video processing such as recognizing human actions, temporal attention is
used to focus on key frames at different point in time that contains crucial
information for predicting the ongoing activity. Temporal adaptive module
(TAM) is a temporal attention that can focus on short-term (local) information and global context information of the data [15]. The composite function
consists of local branch for generating attention weights and global branch
for generating channel-wise adaptive kernel. First, the input feature map
is squeezed using global average pooling to reduce the computational cost.
Subsequently, the local branch executes two 1D convolution operations, with
the first convolution using ReLU, and sigmoid activation for the second to
generate the local weights. The local weights are then multiplied with the featuremap. Meanwhile, the global branch is composed of two fully-connected
layers, with the first layer using ReLU and second layer employing softmax
function to generate the adaptive kernel (weights). Self-attention is a form
of temporal attention, initially proposed for machine translation to enable
the deep learning models to attend different words in a sequence relative to
other words [16]. The attention module has become a fundamental building
block in various natural language processing applications. To generate the
attention weights, the input (word embeddings) is transformed by linear projection to compute query, key and value. Then, dot product between query
and key is computed, and the resultant is normalized by the square root of
the size of the key. Finally, the attention weights are obtained by applying
the softmax function. Self-attention is the fundamental building block of
the Transformer architecture, a key deep learning model in natural language
processing.
Spatial attention focuses on specific regions or spatial location of the input data, enabling the deep learning models to selectively emphasize and
ignore certain features. In the context of computer vision, spatial attention
is crucial in capturing the spatial relationships and context within an image
for accurate prediction. Attention gate is a spatial attention that can identify
and focus the salient regions and suppress feature responses of the insignificant ones. The composite function consists of ReLU activation followed by
9

1 × 1 convolution to reduce channel dimension of the feature maps to a singular feature map. Finally, sigmoid is applied to the feature map to generate
attention weights [17]. The self-attention in the standard Transformer is
not effective in handling image data due to its inherent sequential processing nature and lacks the ability to capture spatial dependencies and local
patterns. To address this limitation, the Vision Transformer (ViT) treats
images as a sequence of non-overlapping patches. A similar computational
pipeline is used to generate the attention weights, the sequence of patches is
transformed by linear projection to compute the query, key and value [18].
The same operations are employed to generate the attention weights. Selfattention is computationally costly due to its quadratic complexity especially
dealing with image data. To reduce the complexity, two learnable linear layers, independent of the input data are adopted as the key and value vectors
[19].
2.3. Activation Functions
The role of the activation function is to transform the weighted sum into
a more classifiable form. This is crucial to the learning behaviour of the deep
learning model, generating non-linear relationships between the input and the
output of the model. The activation function, combined with many hidden
layers allow the neural network to approximate highly complex, non-linear
functions. Many activation functions are available for use in neural networks,
and some of the functions are shown in Fig. 4 - Fig 6. The figures show
the plot of the three popular activation functions. The sigmoid is a classic
example of activation function which is used in logistic regression. Sigmoid
activation function maps the weighted sum to a value in the range of 0 and 1
which can be used for classification. Hyperbolic tangent is another popular
choice of bounded activation function which produces an output between
-1 and 1. Hyperbolic tangent has a stronger gradient, hence the neural
network training often converges faster than sigmoid [20]. For many years,
sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent are the commonly used activation functions.
Nevertheless, the activation functions suffer from vanishing gradient problem,
hindering the efficient training of deep neural networks with many layers [21].
It was shown that neural networks with unbounded activation functions
have the universal approximation property and reduce the vanishing gradient problem. Over the past years, numerous unbounded activation functions
were proposed for neural networks, with softplus [22] and rectified linear unit

10

Figure 4: Sigmoid activation function.

Figure 5: Hyperbolic tangent activation function.

(ReLU) [23] activation function being the notable examples. These activation functions especially ReLU has pivotal role in improving the training
and performance of deep learning models. ReLU has been a cornerstone of
deep learning models due to its computational efficiency and effectiveness
in addressing the vanishing gradient problem. Since then, several variants
of ReLU were proposed including Leaky ReLU [24], sigmoid linear unit [25]
and exponential linear unit [26], each offering unique advantages for building
deep learning-based applications.
2.4. Parameter Learning and Loss Functions
The weights (parameters) of deep learning models are often optimized
using an optimization algorithm called gradient descent, though other optimization algorithms may also be used. However, it has to be noted that
gradient descent is a generic algorithm which can be used to solve a wide
11

Figure 6: Rectified linear unit activation function.

range of optimization problems. In general, gradient descent finds the optimal weights by iteratively updating the weights such that the weights will
result in a minimum prediction error over all instances in the training set.
The prediction error is quantified by a loss function. For classification problems, the commonly used loss function is the negative log-likelihood loss or
cross entropy loss, while the square loss and absolute loss are used for regression problems [27]. The weights of layer l is updated as
l
l
wi,j
= wi,j
− α∇wi,j

(8)

where α is a hyperparameter called learning rate and ∇wi,j is the gradient or
∂J
the derivative of the loss function J with respect to the weight ∂w
l .
i,j
The gradient can be computed across all training set instances, an approach known as batch gradient descent. However, this approach does not
always guarantee convergence to the optimal solution, as it may get stuck
in local minima or saddle points, and the same gradient is used for every
weight update. An alternative approach is to perform the weight update on
the basis of a single instance, but the approach results in a noisy gradient
and becomes computationally intensive due to the frequent weight update.
A more commonly used approach is to perform the weight update over a set
of training instances, known as mini-batch gradient descent. This approach
strikes a balance, providing a less noisy gradient and a more stable training
process.
Several efforts have been made to improve the efficiency of gradient descent. One of the earlier efforts is the inclusion of past rate of change in the
weight update to speed up the training of deep learning models, the algorithm
12

is called gradient descent with momentum [28]. Another effort is to improve
the training convergence by adapting the learning rate based on the occurrence of the features [29]. A more recent work utilizes both adaptive learning
rate and momentum to improve the training efficiency and convergence of
deep learning models [30].
2.5. Regularization Methods
Regularization methods are employed to prevent overfitting in deep learning models and improve their generalization performance. Early stopping is
a method that can detect the onset of overfitting during training by continuously monitoring the validation error. The model is considered overfitting
if the validation error starts to increase at some point of the training while
the training error is decreasing. However, detecting the onset of overfitting
during the training of deep learning models is challenging due to the inherent
stochasticity and the presence of noisy data. Several stopping criteria can
be considered such as using a threshold to check if the decrease of (average)
validation error is significant and count the number of successive increases of
validation error [31].
Dropout is a regularization method that randomly switching off some
neurons in the hidden layers during training with a predefined drop probability (dropout rate) [32]. Dropout has the effect of training and evaluating
exponentially many different deep learning models. The dropout rate is a
hyperparameter that needs to be carefully tuned to balance regularization
and model capacity. Different ranges of dropout rate have been suggested.
The original author suggested a dropout rate between 0.5 and 0.8 [32] while
others recommended a lower dropout rate between 0.1 and 0.3 [33]. Also, it
has been suggested a low dropout rate due to the exponential increase in the
volume of training data [34].
Parameter norm penalty is a regularization method that adds a penalty
term consisting of the network’s weights to the loss function. During the
training, the penalty term discourages large weight values and hence, constraining the model’s capacity and reducing the chance of overfitting. The
common penalty terms are L1 norm penalty [35], L2 norm penalty, also known
as weight decay and a combination of L1 and L2 [36]. An adaptive weight
decay is proposed allowing the regularization strength for each weight to be
dynamically adjusted [37].
Despite the advantages of the mini-batch gradient descent, each minibatch may comprise data from different distributions. Furthermore, the data
13

distribution may change after each weight update, which could slow down
the training process. Batch normalization overcomes this issue by normalizing the summed input to a neuron over a mini batch of training instances
[38]. An alternative method is to perform normalization across the neurons
instead of the mini batch, a method known as layer normalization [39]. Layer
normalization is applicable in recurrent neural network and overcomes the
dependencies on the mini batch size.
3. Types of Deep Learning
Deep learning models can be categorized into deep supervised learning
and deep unsupervised learning.
3.1. Deep Supervised Learning
Deep supervised models are trained with a labelled dataset. The learning
process of these models involve calculating the prediction error through a
loss function and utilizing the error to adjust the weights iteratively until
the prediction error is minimized. Among the deep supervised models, three
important models are identified namely multilayer perceptron, convolutional
neural network and recurrent neural network.
Multilayer perceptron is a neural network model with one or more
hidden fully-connected layers stacked between the input and output layers as
shown in Fig. 7. The width (number of neurons) of the hidden layers and the
depth (number of layers) of the network influence the model’s ability to learn
patterns in the data. Specifically, the width affects the network’s ability to
capture a broader range of features while the depth facilitates the learning of
hierarchical representations. Nevertheless, studies showed that a multilayer
perceptron with a single hidden layer can approximate any continuous function [40], [41]. Multilayer perceptron is effective in various industries and
applications from healthcare to finance [42]. However, multilayer perceptron
requires the input data to be structured in a one-dimensional format e.g.
tabular data, making it less suitable for unstructured data such as image,
text and speech. To leverage multilayer perceptron for unstructured data, a
feature extraction or transformation into structured data is necessary.
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is a neural network model that
leverages the sequential information and memory through the use of recurrent connections, allowing it to effectively process data such as time series,
text, speech and other sequential patterns. As shown in Fig. 8, a recurrent
14

Figure 7: A fully-connected neural network.

neural network is characterized by the recurrent connection which enables
the network to loop back and use internal state from the previous time step
to the next time step. The internal state is parameterized by a set of weights
shared across the sequence of data. The training of recurrent neural networks suffers from the issue of vanishing gradient due to the challenges of
propagation of gradients over a long sequence of data. Variants of recurrent
neural networks are introduced to overcome the problem of vanishing gradient
such as long short-term memory (LSTM) [43] and gated recurrent memory
(GRU) [44]. The improved recurrent neural networks introduce memory cell
and gating mechanisms to retain and discard information in every time step,
allowing for more effective learning dependencies in long sequence. The network architecture can be built using fully-connected and convolutional layers
[45].
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a neural network model that
preserves and leverages the spatial local information in the data through the
use of convolutional layers. Fig. 9 shows a typical architecture of convolutional neural network which comprises of convolutional, pooling and fullyconnected layers. The convolutional and pooling layers are stacked alternately to automatically extract salient features in a hierarchical manner.
The extracted features are then fed to fully-connected layers to predict the
outputs. The final feature maps need to be converted to one-dimensional
vector before they are fed to the fully-connected layers. The conversion can
be performed by flattening the feature maps. CNN architecture is crucial in
increasing the performance of the prediction, as it is designed to efficiently
15

Figure 8: A neural network with recurrent connection.

extract the feature representation of the input data, enabling more accurate
and robust pattern recognition. Over the last decade, several CNN architectures have been proposed, whereby the focus of the improvements has been
on enhancing the feature learning capabilities and addressing challenges such
as vanishing gradient and diminishing feature reuse.

Figure 9: A neural network with convolutional and pooling layers followed by fullyconnected layers.

AlexNet is among the first CNN models that gained widespread recognition and success, marking a significant achievement in the field of deep
learning for computer vision tasks [46]. The model consists of five convolutional layers with max-pooling operation performed after the first and second
convolutional layers, followed by three fully-connected layers. The first and
second convolutional layers utilize a filter size of 11×11 and 5×5 respectively,
and 3 × 3 filter size is used for the remaining convolutional layers. ReLU activation function is used to mitigate the vanishing gradient.
VGG-16 attempts to improve the CNN architecture by adding more convolutional layers, specifically up to 19 layers to capture more intricate fea16

ture representation from input data, followed by three fully-connected layers
[47]. ReLU activation function is used to reduce vanishing gradient. Unlike
AlexNet, all convolutional layers utilize a small fix filter size of 3 × 3 and
max-pooling layer is added after a stack of two or three convolutional layers.
This configuration allows the model to extract more discriminative features
and decreases the number of parameters.
ZFNet is a classic CNN model which has a similar architectural principle
as AlexNet, featuring five convolutional layers with max-pooling layers after
the first and second convolution, followed by three fully-connected layers
[48]. The significant differences are the use of smaller filter size and stride
in the convolutional layers and contrast normalization of the feature maps
which allows the model to capture better features and improving the overall
performance.
Network-in-network introduces two innovative concepts to enhance the
performance of the model [49]. The first was introducing a block of convolutional layers consisting of k×k convolution followed by two 1 × 1 convolution
operations. The pointwise convolutions are similar to applying multilayer
perceptron on the feature maps, allowing the model to approximate more
abstract feature representation. In the preceding models, the final feature
maps are vectorized by flattening operation for classification by the fullyconnected layers. Instead of flattening, network-in-network model calculates
the spatial average of each feature map, and the resulting vector is fed to softmax function for classification. This approach is parameter-less, significantly
reducing the number of parameters.
GoogleNet leverages the fact that visual data can be represented at different scales by incorporating a module which consists of multiple convolutional
pipelines with different filter sizes [50]. The module known as inception utilizes three kernel sizes (5 × 5, 3 × 3, 1 × 1) to capture spatial and channel
information at different scales of resolution as shown in Fig. 10. This configuration enables a more effective feature extraction at both fine-grained and
coarse-grained information from input data. The model architecture utilizes
the inception module at the higher layers while the traditional convolution
and max-pooling block is used to extract primitive and basic features. The
inception modules are stacked upon each other with maximum pooling operation is performed occasionally to reduce the spatial resolution of the feature
maps. GoogleNet utilizes global average pooling to vectorize the final feature
maps before passing it to a fully-connected layer for classification.
Increasing the number of layers enhances the model performance, mainly
17

Figure 10: The inception module.

for solving complex tasks. However, training a very deep neural network
is challenging due to the vanishing gradient problem, where the gradients
that are used to update the network become insignificant or extremely small
as they are backpropagated from the output layer to the earlier layers. A
model called Highway Network overcomes this issue by introducing a gating
mechanism that regulates the information flow of the layers, enabling the flow
of information from the earlier layers to the later layers [51]. Consequently,
this not only mitigates the vanishing gradient problem, but also renders the
gradient-based training more tractable, enabling the training of very deep
neural networks consisting as many as 100 layers.
The gating mechanism of Highway Network increases the number of parameters for regulating the information flow. ResNet is a CNN architecture
that incorporates residual (skip) connection that allows information to bypass certain layers, mitigating the vanishing gradient problem [52]. ResNet
architecture stacks residual blocks, which consists of two or three of convolutional layers with batch normalization and ReLU, and a skip connection
which adds the input to the output of the final convolutional layer as shown
in Fig. 11. If the input dimension does not match with the residual output
dimension, a linear projection is performed by the residual connection to
match the dimensions. In comparison to the gating mechanism of Highway
Network, the residual connection is parameter-free, and thus does not incur additional computational costs. Furthermore, the connections are never
closed whereby all information is always passed through the layers. This innovative concept enables the training of very deep neural networks boasting
as many as 152 layers.
DenseNet is another CNN architecture that overcomes the vanishing gra18

Figure 11: A residual connection.

dient problem. DenseNet follows the same approach as ResNet and Highway
Network, utilizing skip connection to allow information flow from the earlier
layers to later layers. However, DenseNet takes this concept one step further,
by introducing a dense block consisting of multiple convolution functions (layers) with each convolution function performs batch normalization followed
by ReLU and 3 × 3 convolution. Each convolutional layer in the dense block
receives feature maps from all its preceding layers, hence the connection is
referred to as dense connection [53]. This configuration as shown in Fig.
12 maximizes information flow and preserves the feed-forward nature of the
network. Dense blocks can become computationally expensive due to the
increasing number of feature maps. To reduce the computational costs, a
block of 1 × 1 convolutional with batch normalization and max-pooling layers known as transition block is used to reduce the spatial dimension of the
feature maps. The model architecture integrates these dense and transition
blocks, stacking them alternately. The network depth can reach up to 264
layers.

Figure 12: A dense block.

Although skip connections in ResNet effectively mitigate the vanishing
gradient problem, a new challenge arises in the form of diminishing feature
19

reuse as the network becomes deeper. Diminishing feature reuse refers to
the diminishing effectiveness of the previously learned feature maps in subsequent layers, impacting the final prediction. WideResNet is a CNN architecture that is based on ResNet with the aim to mitigate diminishing feature
reuse problem. Instead of making the network deeper, WideResNet makes
the network wider by increasing the number of channels by k factor [54].
The increased width allows the model to capture a more diverse features,
enhancing its ability to learn complex relationships in the input data.
ResNext addresses the diminishing feature reuse by capturing more efficient and diverse features of the input data. ResNext introduces a concept
of cardinality which is loosely based on the inception module as shown in
Fig. 13. The cardinality refers to the number of independent and identical
paths, where each path performs transformation of the input data, divided
along the channel dimension [55]. In other words, instead of solely relying on
increasing the depth of the model, ResNext enhances the feature learning by
parallelizing the feature extraction through this cardinal path. In the proposed architecture, each path configuration is similar to the residual block of
ResNet. The output from each path is then aggregated to form a comprehensive and diverse representation of the input data. The skip connection is used
to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem. WideResNet is a CNN architecture that is based on ResNet with the aim to mitigate diminishing feature
reuse problem. Instead of making the network deeper, WideResNet makes
the network wider by increasing the number of channels by k factor [54].
The increased width allows the model to capture a more diverse features,
enhancing its ability to learn complex relationships in the input data.

Figure 13: A cardinal block.

20

3.2. Deep Unsupervised Learning
Deep unsupervised models are trained with an unlabelled dataset. The
learning process of these models discovering patterns, structures and representations within the data without relying on explicit labels or supervision.
Instead, these models often learn by optimizing objective functions that capture the underlying data characteristics such as clustering, learning useful
feature embeddings and reconstructing input data from compressed representations. Examples of deep unsupervised models are autoencoders, generative
adversarial networks and restricted Boltzmann machines.
Restricted Boltzmann Machine is a generative neural network model that
learns a probability distribution based on a set of inputs. The model consists
of a visible (input) layer and a hidden layer with symmetrically weighted
connections as shown in Fig. 14. The input layer represents the input data
with each node corresponding to a feature or variable while the hidden layer
learns the abstract representation of the input data. Restricted Boltzmann
machine model is trained using contrastive divergence, an algorithm that
is based on a modified form of gradient descent, utilizing a sampling-based
approach to estimate the gradient [56]. It has found success in solving combinative problems such as dimensionality reduction, collaborative filtering and
topic modelling.

Figure 14: A restricted Boltzmann machine.

Deep Belief Network can be viewed as a stack of restricted Boltzmann
21

machines, comprising a visible layer and multiple hidden layers [57] as shown
in Fig. 15. Deep belief network has two training phases. The initial phase
is known as pretraining in which the network is trained layer by layer, with
each layer serves as a pretraining layer of the subsequent layers. This sequential learning allows the hidden layers learn complex hierarchical feature
representation of the data. The second phase is called fine-tuning whereby
the deep belief network model can be further trained with supervision to
perform tasks such as classification and regression [58].

Figure 15: A deep belief network.

Autoencoder is a generative neural network model that learns to encode
the input data into a compressed representation and then reconstructs the
original data from this representation. The layers that encode the input data
is known as encoder while the layers that responsible for the reconstruction
is referred to as the decoder as shown in Fig. 16. The encoded data (hidden layer) represents the abstract features of the input data also known as
latent space or encoding. The decoder can be removed from the autoencoder, creating a standalone model that can be used for data compression
and dimensionality reduction [59], [60]. The decoder can also be replaced
with predictive layers for classification task [61]. The network architecture
can be built using fully-connected and convolutional layers [62].
Several autoencoder variants have been introduced to improve the autoencoder’s ability to capture better feature representation. Some introduced
penalty terms to the loss function such as sparsity penalty (sparse autoencoder) [63] to encourage sparse representation and Jacobian Frobenius norm
(contractive autoencoder) [64] to be less sensitive to small and insignificant
22

Figure 16: An autoencoder.

variations in the input data while encoding the feature representation. Others trained the autoencoder to recover original data from corrupted data
with noise [65]. An improved denoising autoencoder knowns marginalized
denoising autoencoder has been proposed which marginalizes the noise by
adding a term that is linked to the encoding layer [66]. Variational autoencoder is a variant of autoencoder that has similar architecture i.e. encoder,
latent space and decoder. Despite the similarity, instead of learning a fixed
encoding, variational autoencoder learns the probability distribution of the
input data in the latent space [67]. The model can be used to generate data
by sampling from the learned probability distribution. The network architecture can be built by stacking more than one fully-connected layer and
convolutional layer.
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is another generative neural network model that is designed for generating data that adheres closely to the
distribution of the original training set. The model consists of two different
neural networks namely generator and discriminator as shown in Fig. 17.
The generator learns to imitate the distribution of the training set given a
noise vector, effectively outsmarting the discriminator. Simultaneously during the training, the discriminator is trained to differentiate between the real
data from the training set and synthetic data generated by the generator [68].
This intricate dynamic between the networks drives an iterative learning process whereby the generator continually refines its ability to create synthetic
data that closely resembles the real data while the discriminator enhances
its ability to distinguish between authentic and fake data.
The model can be extended by providing the labels to both generator
23

Figure 17: A generative adversarial network.

and discriminator in which the model known as conditional GAN, capable
of generating 1000 image classes [69]. Conditional GANs require a labelled
dataset which might limit its application. InfoGAN is similar to conditional
GAN, but the labels are substituted with latent codes, which allows the
model to be trained in an unsupervised manner [70]. GANs often suffer from
mode collapse whereby the model can only generate a single or small set of
outputs. Wasserstein GAN improves the training by utilizing Wasserstein
loss function which measures the difference between the real and synthesized
data distribution [71]. ProGAN tackles the training instability of GAN by
progressively growing the generator and discriminator. The idea is that the
model is scaled up gradually, starting with the simplest form of the problem
and little by little the problem’s complexity is increased as the training progresses [72]. StyleGAN leverages the progressive GAN’s approach and neural
style transfer to improve quality of the generated data [73]. The model is
characterized by the independent manipulation of both style and content,
allowing it to generate diverse styles and high quality data.

24

4. Applications of Deep Learning
As discussed in the previous section, the application of deep learning
ranges from computer vision [74], natural language processing [75], healthcare
[76], robotics [77], education [78], and many others. This section presents the
applications of deep learning across several areas.
4.1. Computer Vision
Computer vision is an essential field in artificial intelligence. It is a field
of study that focuses on enabling computers to acquire, analyze and interpret visual inputs to derive meaningful information. The visual inputs can
take many forms such as digital images, sequence of images or video and
point cloud, and the source of these inputs can be camera, LiDaR, medical
scanning machine etc. Deep learning, specifically CNN models have been
widely used in real-world computer vision applications including image classification, object detection and image segmentation. This section discusses
more details about the recent advancements in deep learning models that
have been achieved over the past few years.
4.1.1. Image Classification
Image classification is a fundamental task in computer vision which involves categorizing an image into one of predefined classes based on the visual
content. The objective of image classification is to enable computers or machines to differentiate between objects within images, in a manner similar
to how humans interpret visual information. Image classification is a crucial component in various applications such as robotics, manufacturing and
healthcare. LeNet-5, introduced in 1998, is one of the earliest convolutional
neural networks that was successfully trained to classify handwritten digits.
The model underwent a series of improvements, including the use of tanh and
average pooling which enhanced its ability to extract hierarchical features,
ultimately improving overall performance. The model architecture comprises
two convolutional layers, each with an average pooling layer, followed by two
fully-connected layers, including the output layer [79]. Since then, numerous
CNN models have been proposed based on LeNet-5 for image classification
[80, 81] but the most significant one is AlexNet in 2012 which saw a transformative breakthrough in deep learning. AlexNet is considered the first CNN
model with a large number of parameters that significantly improved the
performance of image classification on a very large dataset (ImageNet). The
25

model won first place in ILSVRC 2012, improving the test error from the previous year by almost 10% [46]. Numerous significant CNN models have been
introduced in subsequent ILSVRC competitions including ZFNet, VGG16,
GoogleNet, ResNet and ResNext. In general, the research focused on increasing the number of layers, addressing the problem of vanishing gradient
and diminishing of feature reuse.
Research in image classification continues to evolve with a focus on addressing key challenges to improve the classification performance. One notable trend is the formulation of the loss function to address problems such as
neglecting well-classified instances and imbalance distribution of class labels.
In a particular study, an additive term is introduced to the cross-entropy loss
to reward the models for the correctly classified instances. This formulation
encourages the models to also pay attention to well-classified instances while
focusing on the bad-classified ones [82]. Another study proposes an asymmetric polynomial loss function using the Taylor series expansion. The loss
function allows the training to selectively prioritize contributions of positive
instances to mitigate the issue of imbalance between negative and positive
classes [83]. The asymmetric polynomial loss requires a large number of parameters to be fine-tuned and may lead to overfitting. A robust asymmetric
loss is formulated by introducing a multiplicative term to control the contribution of the negative gradient and making it less sensitive to parameter
optimization [84]. Combining multiple deep learning models improves the
overall performance by leveraging the diverse strengths of individual models.
However, identifying the optimal combination is non-trivial due to the large
number of hyperparameters. A straightforward method is to employ the
weighted sum rule [85]. To enhance the overall performance, an algorithm,
named greedy soups, adds a model based on the validation accuracy [86].
The final prediction is produced via averaging. Multi-symmetry ensembles
framework improves the building of diverse deep learning models by utilizing
contrastive learning [87]. Then, the diverse models are sequentially combined
based on their validation accuracy.
Vision transformers (ViT) offers an alternative to convolutional neural
networks that have long been the dominant architecture for image classification, by leveraging self-attention mechanisms for scalable global representation learning. Despite its effectiveness, ViT is sensitive to hyperparameter
optimization and substandard performance on smaller datasets [88]. Furthermore, ViT lacks the ability to leverage local spatial features which is inherent
in convolutional neural networks [89]. Therefore, several studies attempt to
26

incorporate convolutional layers into ViT architecture to improve its performance and robustness. In particular, conformer is a network architecture
with two branches: CNN branch and a transformer branch to extract local
and global features respectively [90]. Both branches are connected by two
“bridges” of 1 × 1 convolution and up or down sampling operations, allowing
the branches to share their features and enhance the feature representation.
Both branches output predictions which are combined to produce the final
prediction. A hybrid architecture, named MaxViT, combines convolutional
networks and vision transformer to address the lack of scalability issues of
self-attention mechanisms when the model is trained on large input size [91].
The improved vision transformer is composed of two modules whereby the
first module attends local features in non-overlapping image patches and the
global features are attended by processing a grid of sparse and uniform pixels. The transformer is stacked with a block of convolutional layers to extract
local spatial features. The architecture of MaxViT is shown in Figure 18.
Another study proposes a convolutional transformer network, introducing the
depthwise convolutional block into the ViT [92]. This configuration allows
the model to exploit the ability of convolutional networks to extract local spatial features while the ViT attends the extracted local features to focus on
relevant information, enhancing the model’s ability to capture complex patterns and relationships. Specifically, instead of linear mapping, depth-wise
convolutional mapping is used to generate query, key and value matrices.

Figure 18: The architecture of MaxViT [91].

4.1.2. Object Detection
Deep learning plays a major role in significantly advancing the state-ofthe-art in object detection performance. Region-based CNN (R-CNN) is the
first breakthrough in object detection that combines CNN with selective region proposals [93]. The region proposals are the candidate bounding boxes
27

serving as the potential region of interests (objects) within the input image,
and the CNN are used to extract features from the region proposals and classify the regions for object detection. An improved model, named Fast R-CNN
introduces two prediction branches: object classification and bounding box
regression which improves the overall performance of object detection [94].
However, R-CNN and Fast R-CNN models are computationally expensive
and slow, thus practically infeasible for real-time applications. Addressing
this issue, Fast R-CNN is integrated with a region proposal network, referred
to as Faster R-CNN [95]. The region proposal network (RPN) is used to efficiently generate region proposals for object detection. RPN takes an input
image and output a set of rectangle object proposals, each with a confidence
score to indicate the likelihood of an object’s presence. To this end, RPN
introduces the concept of anchor boxes whereby multiple bounding boxes of
different aspect ratios are defined over the feature maps produced by the
convolutional networks. These anchor boxes are then regressed over the feature maps to localize the objects, contributing to the improved speed and
effectiveness of Faster R-CNN. The training of Faster R-CNN is divided into
two stages. First the RPN is pre-trained to generate the region proposals and
then, the Fast R-CNN is trained using the region proposals generated by the
RPN for object detection. The backbone network responsible for extracting
the features for Faster R-CNN is either ZFNet or VGG16.
In two-stage object detectors, the region proposals are generated first,
and then used for object detection. The two-stage process is computationally intensive and infeasible for real-time object detection applications. You
Only Look Once or YOLO proposes a one-stage detection by directly predicting bounding boxes and object’s confidence score in a single forward pass
through the neural network [96]. This single pass architecture significantly
reduces the computational complexity, making YOLO suitable for real-time
object detection applications. In YOLO, the input image is divided into
S×S grids, each grid cell is responsible for detecting the objects present in
the cell. Specifically, each grid cell predicts multiple bounding boxes and
associated object’s confidence score, enabling simultaneous object detection
across the entire image. Subsequent enhancements such as YOLOv3 [97] and
YOLOv4 [98] are proposed, improving the model’s capability and accuracy.
Single Shot Multibox Detector (SSD) is another one-stage detector, aims to
address the issue of real-time object detection [99]. SSD also eliminates the
region proposal generation and directly predicts bounding boxes and confidence scores, reducing the computational complexity. To improve the overall
28

performance, SSD produces the predictions from different levels of feature
maps, allowing detection of objects of different sizes in the input image.
A common issue in object detection problems is the extremely imbalanced
ratio of foreground to background classes. Addressing this issue, RetinaNet
introduces a loss function that is based on the cross entropy called focal loss.
Focal loss reduces the loss contribution of easily classified objects, allowing
the model training to focus on the difficult objects [100]. RetinaNet adopts
the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [101] with ResNet as the backbone network for extracting the feature maps. FPN is a network architecture with
a pyramid structure that efficiently captures multiscale feature representation, facilitating object detection across various sizes. To further improve
the overall performance, EfficientDet introduces bi-directional FPN which
incorporates multi-level feature fusion to better capture multiscale feature
representation [102]. Also, the model utilizes EfficientNet [103] as the backbone network to achieve a balance between computational efficiency and
accuracy.
Object detection performance often relies on a post-processing step called
non-maximum suppression (NMS) to eliminate duplicate detections and select the most relevant bounding boxes. Specifically, NMS sorts all detection
boxes based on their confidence scores, selects a box with the maximum score
and discards the other boxes with a significant overlap with the selected box.
This process is repeated on the remaining detection boxes. However, due
to the inconsistency between the confidence score and the quality of object
localization, NMS retains poorly localized bounding boxes with high confidence score while discarding more accurate predictions with poor confidence
score. To mitigate this limitation, instead of discarding the neighboring boxes
with significant overlap, soft-NMS applies Gaussian function to lower their
confidence scores [104]. The idea is not to discard the neighboring bounding
boxes, but gradually decline their scores based on the extend of the overlap
with the selected box. This results in a smoother suppression, preserving
the better-localized bounding boxes. Adaptive NMS introduces an adaptive
threshold for the suppression of bounding boxes [105]. The algorithm dynamically adjusts the threshold based on the level of overlapping of the selected
box with the other bounding boxes.
Detection Transformer (DeTR) is an end-to-end trainable object detection model that leverages the transformer architecture to eliminates the need
for handcrafted components such as anchor boxes and non-maximum suppression [106]. The self-attention mechanism of the transformer captures the
29

global context and relationships between different parts of the image, allowing it to localize the objects and remove duplicate predictions. The model is
trained with a set of loss functions that perform bipartite matching between
the predicted and ground truth objects. DeTR uses ResNet as backbone
network. Despite the success of DeTR in simplifying and improving object
detection tasks, DeTR suffers from a long training time and low performance
at detecting small objects due to its reliance on self-attention mechanism of
the transformer, which lacks a multiscale feature representation. To mitigate
this limitation, Deformable DeTR introduces a multiscale deformable attention module which can effectively capture feature representation at different
scales [107]. Furthermore, the attention module leverages deformable convolution, allowing the model to adapt to spatial variation and capture more
informative features in the input data. Dynamic DeTR addresses the same
issues by utilizing a deformable convolution-based FPN to learn multiscale
feature representation [108]. Moreover, the model replaces the transformer
encoder with a convolution-based encoder to attend to various spatial features and channels. This modification allows the model to effectively detect
small objects and converge faster during training. The architecture of dynamic DeTR is shown in Figure 19. A training scheme known as Teach-DeTR
is proposed to improve the overall performance of DeTR [109]. The training scheme leverages the predicted bounding boxes by other object detection
models during the training by calculating the loss of one-to-one matching
between the object queries and the predicted boxes.

Figure 19: The architecture of dynamic DeTR [108].

30

4.1.3. Image Segmentation
Image segmentation is another important task in which deep learning
has a significant impact. One of the earliest deep learning models for image
segmentation is the fully convolutional network [110]. A fully convolutional
network consists of only convolutional layers which accepts an input of an
arbitrary size and produce the predicted segmentation map of the same size.
The authors adopt the AlexNet, VGG16 and GoogleNet, replace their fully
connected layers with convolutional layers and append a 1×1 convolutional
layer, followed by bilinear up-sampling to match the size of the input. The
model was considered a significant milestone in image segmentation, demonstrating the feasibility of deep learning for semantic segmentation trained in
end-to-end manner. Deconvolution network is another popular deep learning
model for semantic segmentation [111]. The model architecture consists of
two parts: encoder and decoder. The encoder takes an input image and uses
the convolutional layers to generate the feature maps. The feature maps
are fed to the decoder composed of un-sampling and deconvolutional layers
to predict the segmentation map. SegNet is another encoder-decoder model
for semantic segmentation [112]. The encoder is a sequence of convolutional
(with ReLU) and max-pooling blocks which is analogous to a convolutional
neural network. The decoder is composed of up-sampling layers which upsamples the inputs using the memorized pooled indices generated in the
encoder phase, and convolutional layers without non-linearity. The encoder
progressively reduces the resolution of the input data while extracting abstract features through a series of convolutional and pooling layers. This
process causes the loss of fine-grained information, degrading the overall performance of segmentation. LinkNet mitigates this limitation by passing the
feature maps at several stages generated by the encoder to the decoder, hence
reducing information loss [113]. The model architecture of LinkNet is similar
to SegNet, but utilizes ResNet as the encoder.
While Faster R-CNN is a significant approach in object detection task,
it has been extended to perform instance segmentation task. One such extension is Mask R-CNN which is based on Faster R-CNN, introduces an
additional branch for predicting the segmentation mask [114]. Similar to
Faster R-CNN, Mask R-CNN utilizes the RPN to generate region proposals
and then the region of interest alignment is applied to extract more accurate
features from the proposed regions. Mask R-CNN does not leverage the multiscale feature representation which may degrade the overall performance

31

of segmentation. To overcome this limitation, Path Aggregation Network
(PANet) incorporates the FPN and introduces a bottom-up pathway to facilitate the propagation of the low-level information [115]. The pathway takes
the feature maps of the previous stage as input and performs 3×3 convolution
with stride 2 to reduce the spatial size of the feature maps. The generated
feature maps are then fused with the feature maps from the FPN through
the lateral connection. The model adopts the three branches as in Mask RCNN. MaskLab is an instance segmentation model based on Faster R-CNN,
consisting of object detection, segmentation and instance (object) center direction prediction branches [116]. The direction prediction provides useful
information to distinguish instances of the same semantic label, allowing the
model to further refine the instance segmentation results.
Attention mechanisms have been integrated into the segmentation models
to learn the weights of multiscale features at each pixel location. A multistage context refinement network introduces a context attention refinement
module that is composed of two parts, context feature extraction and context
feature refinement [117]. The context feature extraction captures both local
and global context information, fuses both contextual information and passes
it to the context feature refinement while the context feature refinement removes redundant information and generates a refined feature representation,
improving the utilization of contextual information. The context attention
is added to the skip connection between the encoder and the decoder. Handcrafted features are often abandoned for automatic feature extraction using
convolutional networks. However, it is argued that the interpretability and
domain-specific knowledge embedded in handcrafted features can provide
valuable insights. To this end, an attention module based on the covariance
statistic is introduced to model the dependencies between local and global
context of the input image [118]. Two types of attention are introduced:
spatial covariance attention focuses on the spatial distribution and channel
covariance attention attends to the important channels. Furthermore, the
covariance attention does not require feature shape conversion, hence significantly reducing the space and time complexity of the model.
The convolutional layers use local receptive fields to process input data
which can be effective for exploiting spatial patterns and hierarchical features but may find it difficult to capture global relationships across the entire image. The ViT has been leveraged to mitigate this issue in semantic
segmentation [119]. Specifically, the input image is divided into patches and
treated as input to the transformer to capture the global relationship between
32

the patches, significantly improving the prediction of the segmentation map.
Global context ViT aims to address the lack of ViT’s ability to leverage local
spatial features [120]. As shown in Figure 20, the transformer consists of
local and global self-attention modules. The role of global self-attention is to
capture the global contextual information from different image regions while
the short-range information is captured by the local self-attention. Multiscale feature representation is crucial for accurate semantic segmentation.
However, the transformer often combines the features without considering
their appropriate (optimal) scales, thus affecting the segmentation accuracy.
Transformer scale gate is a module proposed to address the issue of selecting an appropriate scale based on the correlation between patch-query pairs
[121]. The transformer takes attention (correlation) maps as input and calculates the weights of the multi-scale features for each image patch, allowing
the model to adaptively choose the optimal scale for each patch.

Figure 20: The architecture of global context ViT [120].

4.1.4. Image Generation
Image generation refers to the process of creating images based on input
texts. Generally, the task can be divided into three stages. The first stage
is extracting features from the input text, followed by generating the image
and finally controlling the image generation process to ensure the output
meets specific criteria and constraints. This section focuses on the progress
made in the development of deep learning models of the second stage (image generation) since it directly impacts the quality of the generated images.
Variational autoencoder is one of the earliest deep learning models that is
capable of generating images [67]. Variational autoencoder learns to generate data by capturing the underlying (Gaussian) distribution of the training
data. During the generation process, the distribution parameters are sampled and passed to the decoder to generate the output image. Although the
generated images are blurry and unsatisfactory, it has shown a lot of potential
in image generation tasks. The introduction of GAN significantly improved
33

the quality of generated images. GAN consists of two connected neural networks, a generator and a discriminator that are trained simultaneously in a
competitive manner [68]. The generator learns to generate realistic images to
fool the discriminator, while the discriminator learns to distinguish between
fake and real images. The generated images are less blurry and more realistic. Several enhanced models have been proposed to improve its usability
and overall performance such as CGAN [69] which allows us to tell what image to be generated, and the deep convolutional GAN (DCGAN) [122] which
provides a more stable structure for image generation. DCGAN is the basis
of many subsequent improvements in GANs.
StackGAN divides the process of image generation into two stages [123].
Stage-I generates a low-resolution image by creating basic shapes and colors
and the background layout using the random noise vector. Stage-II completes the details of the image and produces a high-resolution photo-realistic
image. StackGAN++ is the enhanced model of StackGAN whereby it consists of multiple generators with shared parameters to generate multiscale
images [124]. The generators have a progressive goal with the intermediate
generators generating images of varying sizes and the deepest generator producing the photo-realistic image. HDGAN is a generative model featuring a
single-stream generator with hierarchically nested discriminators at intermediate layers [125]. These layers, each connected to a discriminator, generate
multiscale images. The lower resolution outputs are used to learn semantic
image structures while the higher resolution outputs are used to learn finegrained details of the image. StackGAN heavily relies on the quality of the
generated image in Stage-I. DM-GAN incorporates a memory network for
image refinement to cope with badly generated images in Stage-I [126]. The
memory network dynamically selects the words that are relevant to the generated image, and then refines the details to produce better photo-realistic
images.
AttnGAN is the first to incorporate attention mechanisms into the multiple generators to focus on words that are relevant to the generated image
[127]. To this end, in addition to encoding the whole sentence into a global
sentence vector, the text encoder encodes each word into a word vector as
shown in Figure 21. Then, the image vector is used to attend to the word
vector using the attention modules at each stage of the multistage generators. Furthermore, AttnGAN introduces a loss function to compute the
similarity between the generated image and the associated sentence, improving the performance of image generation. A similar work is reported whereby
34

the model known as ResFPA-GAN, incorporates attention modules into the
multiple generators [128]. Specifically, a feature pyramid attention module
is proposed to capture high semantic information and fuse the multiscale
feature, enhancing the overall performance of the model. DualAttn-GAN
improves AttnGAN by incorporating visual attention modules to focus on
important features along both spatial and channel dimensions [129]. This
allows the model to better understand and capture both the context of the
input sentence and the fine details of the image, resulting in more realistic
image generation.

Figure 21: The architecture of AttnGAN [127].

Although multistage generators improve image generation performance
by leveraging multiscale representation, the generated images may contain
fuzzy shapes with coarse features. DF-GAN replaces the multistage generators with a single-stage deep generator featuring residual connections and
trained with hinge loss [130]. Furthermore, DF-GAN introduces a regularization strategy on the discriminator that applies a gradient penalty on real images with matching text, allowing the model to generate more text-matching
images. DMF-GAN an improved DF-GAN, incorporates three novel components designed to leverage semantic coherence between the input text and
the generated image [131]. The first component is the recurrent semantic
fusion module, which models long range dependencies between the fusion
blocks. The second component is the multi-head attention module which is
placed towards the end of the generator to leverage the word features, forcing the generator to generate images conditioned on the relevant words. The
last component is the word-level discriminator which provides fine-grained
feedback to the generator, facilitating the learning process and improving
35

the overall quality of the generated images. Figure 22 shows the architecture of DMF-GAN. The process of image generation involves feeding a noise
vector to the generator at the very beginning of the network. However, as
the generator goes deeper, the noise effect may be diminished, affecting the
diversity of the image generation results. To mitigate this issue, DE-GAN
incorporates a dual injection module into the single-stage generator [132].
The dual injection module consists of two text fusion layers followed by a
noise broadcast operation. The text fusion layer takes the sentence embedding and fuses it with the input feature map using the fully-connected layer.
Then noise is injected into the output feature map to retain the randomness in the generation process, improving diversity and generalization of the
model.

Figure 22: The architecture of DMF-GAN [131].

4.2. Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing (NLP) refers to the field of artificial intelligence that concerns with enabling computers to process, analyze and interpret human languages to extract useful information. Some of the common
tasks in NLP are machine translation, text classification and text generation.
Deep learning has been widely applied to solve real-world NLP problems.
This section presents the recent advancements in deep learning models that
have been designed for NLP over the past few years.
4.2.1. Text Classification
Text classification known as text categorization, is a task that involves
assigning predefined categories or labels to a piece of text based on its content. The task is commonly used in various applications such as document
classification, sentiment analysis and spam filtering. Numerous deep learning
36

models have been proposed for text classification in the past few decades, and
multilayer perceptron is one of the earliest architectures adopted to classify
documents [133, 134]. The model typically has a single hidden layer with
a number of units between 15 and 150. Text data is inherently sequential,
as it is composed of a series of words and symbols arranged in a specific
order. This property makes RNN and its variants particularly well-suited for
processing and analyzing text data. In [135], RNN with two hidden layers,
each with 6 units is used to classify news documents into eight classes. A
study was conducted to investigate the variants of RNN i.e. LSTM and GRU
for text classification [136]. The input to the model is a sequence of words
of fixed length. The input sequence is also sliced into smaller subsequences
of fixed length and passed to an independent model for parallelization. A
convolutional layer can extract local features, allowing the model to leverage
hierarchical temporal information in textual data. A hybrid model of convolutional and LSTM architecture is proposed for text classification [137]. Two
parallel convolutional layers are used to extract features from word embeddings, followed by max-pooling layers to reduce the feature dimensions. The
reduced features are then concatenated and passed to LSTM for prediction.
Although CNN and RNN provide excellent results on text classification
tasks, the models lack the ability to attend to specific words based on their
importance and context. To address this limitation, attention mechanism is
incorporated into the model to focus on the important features, enhancing the
text classification accuracy. In [138], two attention modules are introduced to
capture the contextual information of the feature sequence extracted by bidirectional LSTM. The first attention module attends the sequence in forward
direction while the backward sequence is attended by the second attention
module. The convolutional layers are used before the bi-directional LSTM
to extract features from the word embedding. The attention modules require
sequential processing using RNN-based architecture such as LSTM and GRU
which may lead to information loss and distorted representations, particularly
in long sequence. Furthermore, the attention modules focus on inter-sequence
relationships between the input sequence and the target, ignoring the intrasequence relationships or the dependencies between the words. In [139], the
deep learning model is integrated with self-attention to capture the intrasequence relationships between the features in the sequence. A multilayer of
bi-directional LSTMs is utilized to extract feature sequence from the word
embedding before the self-attention module attends the feature sequence to
compute the attention weights. To further improve the overall performance, a
37

multichannel features consisting of three input pipelines is introduced [140].
Each pipeline concatenates the word vector with a feature vector derived
from the input sequence such as the word position, part-of-speech and word
dependency parsing. The input pipeline is connected to bi-directional LSTM,
followed by a self-attention module to learn the dependencies between the
features in the sequence.
The transformer is a deep learning architecture that transforms sequential data using self-attention mechanisms, allowing long-range dependencies
and complex patterns to be captured. The architecture is the basis of various
advanced deep learning models and the Bi-directional Encoder Representations from Transformers popularly known as BERT is one of the examples
that leverage transformer for pre-training on large scale textual data [141].
BERT is a bi-directional transformer encoder that is designed for various NLP
tasks, capable of capturing the contextual information from both preceding
and succeeding words in the input sequence. Several improvements have been
made to BERT to enhance its overall performance such as ALBERT [142],
RoBERTa [143] and DeBERTa [144]. The improvements are centered around
refining the pre-training approaches such as dynamic masking of the training
instances, training with a block of sentences and representing each input word
using two vectors, both content and position of the word. Most of the recent
works leverage BERT and its variants to capture effective feature representation of the input sequence. In [145], BERT and its variants are leveraged
to capture the long-range dependencies of the input tokens. The features are
then passed to a layer normalization and a linear fully-connected layer with
dropout for classification. Similar work is reported in [146] whereby BERT
is used to extract the features and the features are then passed to a hybrid of
convolutional and recurrent neural networks. The traditional machine learning algorithms have been used to classify the features extracted by BERT
[147]. The study shows machine learning algorithms can effectively leverage
the rich contextual features extracted by BERT for downstream classification
tasks.
In text classification, the text labels can help in capturing the words relevant to the classification. The label-embedding attentive model is one of the
earliest attempts to joint learn the label and word embeddings in the same
latent space and measure the compatibility between labels and words using
cosine similarity [148]. The joint embedding allows the model to capture
more effective text representations, increasing the overall performance of the
model. LANTRN is a deep learning model that leverages label embedding
38

extracted by BERT and entity information e.g. person name and organization name for text classification [149]. The entity recognition module is based
on bi-directional LSTM and conditional random field layers to calculate the
probability of each word in each entity label. The model introduces a label
embedding bi-directional attention to learn the attention weights of tokenlabel and sequence-label pairs. Furthermore, a transformer is introduced
to learn local short-term dependencies of multiple short text sequences and
long-term dependencies of the input sequence. Aspect refers to a specific
attribute of an entity within the text and incorporating this information enhances the model’s understanding of the nuances of the text. BERT-MSL is
a multi-semantic deep learning model with aspect-aware enhancement and
four input pipelines: left sequence, right sequence, global sequence and aspect target [150]. The aspect-aware enhancement module takes the features
extracted by BERT, and performs average pooling followed by a linear transform. Then the output is concatenated with the outputs produced by the
local and global semantic learning modules. The concatenated features are
then jointly attended by a multi-head attention for text classification. Figure
23 shows the architecture of BERT-MSL.

Figure 23: The architecture of BERT-MSL [150].

39

4.2.2. Neural Machine Translation
Neural machine translation (NMT) refers to the automated process of
translating text from one language to another language. Numerous deep
learning models have been proposed for NMT which can be categorized into
RNN-based and CNN-based models. One of the first successful RNN-based
models is the encoder-decoder [44, 151]. The model consists of two connected
subnetworks (the encoder and the decoder) for modelling the translation process as shown in Figure 24. The encoder reads the source sentence word by
word and produces a fixed-length context vector (final hidden state). This
process is known as source sentence encoding as shown in the figure. Given
the context vector, the decoder generates the target sentence (translation)
word by word. This modelling of the translation can be seen as a mapping between the source sentence to the target sentence via the intermediate
context vector in the semantic space. The context vector represents the
summary of the input sequence’s semantic meaning, providing a compressed
representation that captures the essence of the source sentence. However,
the compression process can sometimes result in the loss of information especially those early in the sequence. Bi-directional RNN may mitigate the
loss of information by modelling the sequence in reverse order. However,
the problem can still persist, particularly in cases where the input is a long
sequence.

Figure 24: The architecture of an encoder-decoder [152].

Attention mechanism was introduced to solve the problem of learning
long input sequences [153]. Attention alleviates this issue by attending on
different words of the input sequences when predicting the target sequences
at each time step. Unlike the standard encoder-decoder model, attention
derives the context vector from the hidden states of both the encoder and
decoder, and the alignment between the source and target. This mechanism
40

allows the model to focus on the important words, increasing the overall accuracy of the translation. Several alignment score functions have been proposed for calculating the attention weights. Some of the popular functions
are additive [153], dot-product, location-based [154], and scaled dot-product
[16]. The attention weights are calculated by attending to the entire hidden states of the encoder. This attention, also known as global attention, is
computationally expensive. Instead of attending to all hidden states, local attention attends to a subset of hidden states, thus reducing the computational
cost [154]. Google Neural Machine Translation is a popular encoder-decoder
model with an attention mechanism that significantly improves the accuracy
of machine translation [155]. As shown in Figure 25, the model consists of
a multilayer of LSTMs with eight encoder and decoder layers and an attention connection between the bottom layer of the decoder to the top layer of
the encoder. Furthermore, to deal with the challenging words to predict, a
word is tokenized into subwords e.g. feud is broken down into fe and ud,
allowing the model to generalize well to new and uncommon words. A year
later, the self-attention mechanism was proposed, significantly improving the
overall accuracy of machine translation [16]. Self-attention, also known as
intra-attention, allows the deep learning model to capture the dependencies
between the input words. The self-attention mechanism is the fundamental
building block of the transformer model, which has since become a cornerstone in natural language processing and other domains.

Figure 25: The architecture of Google Neural Machine Translation [155].

Despite the success of transformer, the model falls short in capturing
nuances of human language and struggles with tasks requiring deeper under41

standing of context. This can be especially challenging when the tasks involve
formality, colloquialism, and subtle cultural references that may not directly
equivalent in the target language, resulting in inaccurate translation or losing the original meaning. One of the approaches to include context into the
input sequence is concatenating the current source sentence with the previous (context) sentences and feeding the whole input to the transformer [156].
The model is trained to predict the translated sentence including the context translation. At inference time, only the translation is considered while
the context translation is discarded. Furthermore, the approach encodes the
sentence position and segment-shifted position to improve the distinction between current sentences and context sentences. In [157], the source sentence
is prefixed with the summary of the document to contextualize the input sentence. The summary is the set of salient words that represents the essence of
the document, resolving ambiguity associated with the translation. A study
was conducted to determine the optimal technique of aggregating contextual
features [158]. Three techniques were studied namely concatenation mode,
flat mode and hierarchical mode, and the experimental results show that
concatenation mode achieved the best results. In [159], a training method
is introduced to train the deep learning machine translation model to generate translation involving honorific words. The training method indicates
the honorific context in the target sentence using an honorific classifier to
guide the model to attend to the related tokens. Unlike other studies where
the context features are included by concatenation, the training method assigns weights to the context tokens indicated by the honorific classifier. This
allows the model to generate a more accurate translation with honorifics.
Finally, the performance of transformer relies on large-scale training data.
However, for the vast majority of languages, only limited amounts of training data exist. To mitigate this problem, recent studies introduce shallow
transformer architectures [160], explore the effect of hyperparameter finetuning [161], exploiting monolingual corpus to enhance the bilingual dataset for
model training [162] and leveraging visual input as contextual information
for the translation task [163].
4.2.3. Text Generation
Text generation refers to the process of creating texts based on a given
input whereby the input can be in the form of texts, images, graphs, tables
or even tabular data. Due to the various forms of inputs, text generation
has a wide range of applications, including creative writing, image captioning
42

and music generation. This section focuses on the progress made in text-totext generation tasks such as question answering, dialogue generation and
text summarization. The recurrent neural network and its variants play an
important role in text generation tasks for their strong ability to model sequential data. One of the earliest works on question answering is based on
the RNN-based encoder-decoder model whereby the encoder takes the question embedding and processes it using bi-directional LSTM, and the decoder
generates the corresponding answer [164]. Additionally, to prevent semantic
loss and enable the model to focus on the important words in the input sequence, a convolution operation is applied to the word embedding, and an
attention mechanism is then used to attend to the output of the convolution operation. Similar work is reported in [165] in which a knowledge-based
module is introduced to calculate the relevance score between the question
and the relevant facts in the knowledge base. This improves the text (answer) generation by the decoder. Another work is described in [166] where
an encoder-decoder with attention for dialogue generation is optimized using reinforcement learning. The model is first trained in supervised learning
manner and then improved using the policy gradient method to diversify the
responses. Ambiguous content in question answering sentences is a challenge
in text generation and can lead to incorrect and uncertain responses. Crosssentence context aware bi-directional model introduces a parallel attention
module to compute the co-attention weights at the sentence level, accounting
for the relationships and similarities in the question and the answer [167].
The transformer has been leveraged for text generation tasks. An incremental transformer-based encoder is proposed to incrementally encode the
historical sequence of conversations [168]. The decoder is a two-pass decoder
that is based on the deliberation network, generates the next sentence. The
first pass focuses on contextual coherence of the conversations while the second pass refines the output of the first pass. BERT and ALBERT have been
used as pre-trained models for question answering task [169]. The study
found that the performance of the models is sensitive to random assignment
of the initial weights especially on small datasets [170]. T-BERTSum is a
model based on BERT, designed to address the challenge of long text dependence and leveraging latent topic mapping in text summarization [171].
The model integrates a neural topic module to infer topics and guide summarization, uses a transformer network to capture long-range dependencies
and incorporates multilayers of LSTM for information filtering. Exploiting
domain knowledge is essential in reducing the semantic gap between the
43

deep learning models and the text corpus. KeBioSum is a knowledge infusion framework to inject domain knowledge into the pre-trained BERTs for
text summarization [172]. In the framework, the relevant information is detected and extracted from the domain knowledge, generating label sequences
of the sentences. The label data is then used to train the text summarization
model using discriminative and generative training approaches, infusing the
knowledge into the model.
4.3. Time Series and Pervasive Computing
Pervasive computing, often referred to as ubiquitous computing, is the
process of integrating computer technology into everyday objects and surroundings so that they become intelligent, networked, and able to communicate with one another to offer improved services and functionalities [173].
According to He et al [174], the role of pervasive computing is foremost in
the field where it provides the ability to distribute computational services to
the surroundings where people work, leading to trust, privacy, and identity.
Examples of pervasive computing applications include smart homes with connected appliances, wearable devices that monitor health and fitness, smart
cities with sensor networks for traffic management, and industrial applications that utilize the Internet of Things (IoT) for monitoring and control.
Generally, the continuous interaction of interconnected devices in pervasive
computing often result in time series data, which captures the evolution of
various parameters over time.
For instance, medical sensors, such as electrocardiograms (ECG) and electroencephalograms (EEG), generate time series data that contain critical diagnostic information, which deep learning can use to detect anomalies, predict diseases, and classify medical conditions with improved accuracy. Also,
devices such as accelerometers, magnetometers and gyroscopes, among others
can be used to capture human activity signals, which are often represented
as time series of state changes [175]. In traditional machine learning, features
such as mean, variance and others are manually extracted from times series
of state changes before human activity classification. However, deep learning models automatically extract features [61]. Also, in other fields such as
finance, which entail time series data, deep learning has been instrumental
in stock price prediction [176], fraud detection [177], and algorithmic trading
[178], among others. Generally, deep learning networks excel at capturing
intricate temporal relationships within time-series data, enabling more precise predictions and improved decision-making. Based on this, several deep
44

learning models have been employed for feature learning across various time
series and pervasive computing domains.
4.3.1. Human Activity Recognition
Human activity recognition (HAR) finds application across various domains including intelligent video surveillance, environmental home monitoring, video storage and retrieval, intelligent human-machine interfaces, and
identity recognition, among many others. It includes various research fields,
including the detection of humans in video, estimating human poses, tracking
humans, and analyzing and understanding time series data [179]. Despite the
advancements in vision-based HAR, there exist inherent limitations. Generally, vision-based approaches heavily rely on camera systems, which may
have restricted views or be affected by lighting conditions, occlusions, and
complex backgrounds [175]. Additionally, vision-based HAR struggles with
identifying actions that occur beyond the range of the camera or actions that
are visually similar.
Wearable sensors offer a promising alternative to overcome these limitations. By directly capturing data from the individual, wearable sensors
provide more comprehensive and accurate information about human activities. The signals obtained from wearable sensors typically represent time
series data reflecting state changes in activities. Deep learning models can
effectively learn from these signals, allowing for robust and accurate recognition of human activities. Moreover, wearable sensors offer the advantage
of mobility, enabling activity recognition in various environments and situations where vision-based systems may be impractical or ineffective [180].
Generally, the time series nature of signals from wearable sensors presents an
excellent opportunity for deep learning models to excel in recognizing human
activities with high accuracy and reliability.
Several researchers have proposed the use of CNN, RNN, and Hybrid
models for deep learning based feature learning in wearable sensor HAR. For
instance, using two-dimensional CNN (Conv2D), several researchers, as seen
in [181], [182] and [183], among others, have developed deep learning models
for wearable sensor HAR, despite the time series nature of the data. This is
often done by treating the time series signals from wearable sensors as 2D
images by reshaping them appropriately. To achieve this, researchers often
organize each time series signal into a matrix format, with time along one
axis and sensor dimensions along the other, before creating a pseudo-image
representation, which allows the matrix to be be fed into Conv2D layers
45

for feature extraction. Conv2D layers excel at capturing spatial patterns
and relationships within images, and by treating the time series data as
images, these layers can learn relevant spatial features that contribute to
activity recognition. The convolution operation performed by Conv2D filters
across both the time and sensor dimensions, allowing the network to identify
patterns and features that may be indicative of specific activities.
Even though Conv2D can effectively capture spatial dependencies within
the data, it often struggles to capture temporal dependencies inherent in
time series data. Since Conv2D processes data in a grid-like fashion, it does
not fully leverage the sequential nature of the time series, potentially leading to less effective feature extraction for wearable sensor HAR tasks. For
this reason, recent HAR architectures have leveraged one-dimensional CNN
(Conv1D) and other RNNs for automatic feature extraction. Conv1D layers
are specifically designed to capture temporal dependencies within sequential
data. They operate directly on the time series data without reshaping it into
a 2D format, allowing them to capture temporal patterns more effectively.
Conv1D layers are better suited for extracting features from time series data,
making them a more natural choice for wearable sensor HAR [61].
For instance, Ragab et al. [184] proposed a random search Conv1D model,
and evaluated the performance of the model on UCI-HAR dataset. The result showed that the model achieved a recognition accuracy of 95.40% when
classifying the six activities in the dataset. However, the model exhibited
extended training times due to the dynamic nature of some activities within
the dataset. To address this, [185] proposed the use of varying kernel sizes
in Conv1D layers to recognize various activities, including sitting, standing, walking, sleeping, reading, and tilting. Also, a few Conv1D layers were
stacked in order to streamline the time optimization process for training the
neural network. Also, some researchers have proposed models that combine
machine learning algorithms with Conv1D in HAR, as seen in Shuvo et al.
[186]. Their work presented a two-stage learning process to improve HAR by
classifying activities into static and dynamic using Random Forest, before
using Support Vector Machine to identify each static activity, and Conv1D
to recognize dynamic activities. The result showed that the method achieved
an accuracy of 97.71% on the UCI-HAR dataset.
Following these advancements, several researchers have further explored
Conv1D architectures with various modifications, to enhance feature learning in activity recognition systems. For example, Han et al. [187] developed
a two-stream CNN architecture as a plug-and-play module to encode con46

textual information of sensor time series from different receptive field sizes.
The module was integrated into existing deep models for HAR at no extra
computation cost. Experiments on OPPORTUNITY, PAMAP2, UCI-HAR
and USC-HAD datasets showed that the module improved feature learning capabilities. A similar research reported in [188] proposed the WSense
module to address the issue of differences in the quality of features learnt,
regardless of the size of the sliding window segmentation, and experimented
on PAMAP2 and WISDM datasets. The results showed that by plugging the
WSense module into Conv1D architectures, improved activity features can
be learned from wearable sensor data for human activity recognition.
Similarly, some researchers have also proposed the use of standalone
RNNs in HAR, and a hybrid of Conv1D architectures with RNNs such as
LSTMs [189], BiLSTMs [190, 191], GRUs [192] and BiGRUs [193, 194] in
order to fully harness the feature learning capabilities of both CNN and
RNNs. For instance, Nafea et al. [195], leveraged Bi-LSTM and Conv1D
with increasing kernel sizes to learn features at various resolutions. Human
activity features were extracted using the stacked convolutional layers with
a Bi-LSTM layer, before including a flattening layer and a fully connected
layer for subsequent classification. However, the model had issues extracting quality features of dynamic activities compared to static activities. To
address such issues, some research works have incorporated attention mechanisms in Conv1D-based architectures to improve feature learning of dynamic
and complex activities from time series signals obtained from wearable sensors. For example, Khan and Ahmad [196] designed three lightweight convolutional heads, with each specialized in feature extraction from wearable
sensor data. Each head comprised stacked layers of Conv1Ds, along with
embedded attention mechanisms to augment feature learning. The results
demonstrated that integrating multiple 1D-CNN heads with attention mechanisms can enhance feature learning for Human Activity Recognition. Ayo
and Noor [197] designed three feature learning pipelines, each pipeline consisting of two concurrent layers of Conv1D and LSTM with max-pooling,
which are then concatenated and processed using an attention mechanism
to enhance feature learning. These diverse modifications and adaptations
showcase the versatility and potential of deep learning models in achieving
state-of-the-art in HAR systems.

47

Figure 26: The architecture of multi-head CNN model [196].

4.3.2. Speech Recognition
Speech, as the primary mode of human communication, has captivated
researchers for over five decades, especially since the inception of artificial
intelligence [198]. From the earliest endeavors to understand and replicate
the complexities of human speech, to contemporary advancements leveraging
cutting-edge technologies, the quest for accurate and efficient speech recognition systems has been relentless. In recent years, the emergence of deep
learning techniques has revolutionized the speech recognition field. Deep
learning has demonstrated unparalleled success in processing and extracting
intricate patterns from vast amount of data. When applied to the realm
of speech recognition, deep learning have surpassed traditional approaches
by learning intricate features directly from raw audio signals, circumventing the need for handcrafted features and complex preprocessing pipelines.
This paradigm shift has significantly advanced the state-of-the-art in speech
recognition, enabling systems to achieve unprecedented levels of accuracy
and robustness across various languages, accents, and environmental conditions. Generally, deep learning has been extended to other essential applications of speech recognition, such as speaker identification [199, 200], emotion
recognition [201], language identification [202], accent recognition [203], age
recognition [204] and gender recognition [205], among many others.
Prior to the adoption of deep learning in speech recognition, the foun-

48

dation of traditional speech recognition systems was the use of Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMMs), which are often combined with Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs) to represent speech signals [206]. This is because a speech
signal can be thought of as a short-term stationary signal. The spectral representation of the sound wave is modelled by each HMM using a mixture of
Gaussian. However, they are considered statistically inefficient for modelling
non-linear or near non-linear functions [207, 198]. This is because HMMs rely
on a set of predefined states and transition probabilities, making assumptions
about the linearity and stationarity of the underlying data. While suitable
for modelling certain aspects of speech, HMMs often fall short when tasked
with representing the intricate nonlinearities and variability present in speech
signals. Speech, by nature, exhibits nonlinear and dynamic characteristics,
with features such as intonation, rhythm, and phonetic variations challenging the simplistic assumptions of traditional statistical models like HMMs.
In other words, GMM-HMM approach had limitations in capturing complex
acoustic patterns and long-term dependencies in speech [208].
In recent times, CNN and RNNs have been leveraged for automatic speech
recognition in order to consider a longer or variable temporal window for context information extraction [209]. Generally, CNNs are well-suited for capturing local patterns and hierarchical features in data, making them effective
for modelling acoustic features in speech. By directly learning features from
raw speech signals, CNNs bypassed the need for handcrafted features used in
traditional GMM-HMM systems. Additionally, CNNs can capture long-range
dependencies in the data, which is crucial for understanding the context of
speech. Likewise, the RNNs are suitable choice for exploring extended temporal context information in one processing level for feature extraction and
modelling.
Based on this, several researchers have proposed the use of both CNN
and variants of RNNs for automatic speech recognition and for other speech
related tasks. For instance, [210], used CNN to classify speech emotions and
benchmarked on a dataset consisting of seven classes (anger, disgust, fear,
happiness, neutral, sadness and surprise). However, CNN lack the ability to
model temporal dependencies explicitly. In speech recognition, understanding the temporal context of speech is essential for accurate transcription.
Also, speech signals are inherently sequential, and information from previous
time steps is crucial for understanding the current speech segment. CNNs,
by design, do not inherently capture this sequential nature. For this reason, variants of RNNs have been leveraged to collect extended contexts in
49

speeches. This is because RNNs are designed to model sequential data by
maintaining hidden states that capture information from previous time steps.
This allows them to capture temporal dependencies effectively, making them
well-suited for ASR tasks. In [211], the authors evaluated the performance of
RNN, LSTM, and GRU on a popular benchmark speech dataset (ED-LIUM).
The results showed that LSTM achieved the best word error rate while the
GRU optimization was faster and achieved word error rate close to that of
LSTM.
However, RNN architectures process input sequences sequentially, which
limits their ability to capture global context information effectively. As a
result, they may struggle to understand the entire context of a spoken utterance, leading to lower transcription accuracy, particularly in tasks requiring
understanding beyond local dependencies. Also, most CNN and RNN automatic speech recognition systems comprise of separate acoustic, pronunciation, and language modelling components that are trained independently.
Usually, the acoustic model bootstraps from an existing model that is used
for alignment in order to train it to recognise context dependent (CD) states
or phonemes. The pronunciation model, curated by expert linguists, maps
the sequences of phonemes produced by the acoustic model into word sequences. For this reason, Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) models are being
proposed in automatic speech recognition to train the acoustic, pronunciation, and language modelling components jointly in a single system [212].
Seq2Seq models in automatic speech recognition are a class of models that
aim to directly transcribe an input sequence of acoustic features such as
speech spectrograms or Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients into a sequence of
characters or words representing the recognized speech. There have been a
variety of sequence-to-sequence models explored in the literature, including
Recurrent Neural Network Transducer (RNN-T) [213], Listen, Attend and
Spell (LAS) [214], Neural Transducer [215], Monotonic Alignments [216] and
Recurrent Neural Aligner (RNA) [217].
As shown in Figure 27, the encoder component takes the input sequence
of acoustic features and processes it to create a fixed-dimensional representation, often called the context vector. This representation captures the
essential information from the input sequence and serves as the basis for
generating the output sequence. The decoder component takes the context vector produced by the encoder and generates the output sequence. In
ASR, this output sequence consists of characters or words representing the
recognized speech. The decoder is typically implemented as a recurrent neu50

Figure 27: Sequence-to-Sequence

ral network (RNN), such as a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) or Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) network, or it could be a transformer-based architecture. During training, the model learns to map input sequences to their
corresponding output sequences by minimizing a suitable loss function, such
as cross-entropy loss. This is typically done using techniques like backpropagation through time (BPTT) or teacher forcing, where the model is trained
to predict the next token in the output sequence given the previous tokens.
Thereafter, the trained model is used to transcribe unseen speech input. The
encoder processes the input sequence to produce the context vector, which
is then fed into the decoder to generate the output sequence. In some cases,
beam search [218, 219] or other decoding strategies may be used to improve
the quality of the generated output.
In [220], the authors explored various structural and optimization enhancements to their LAS Sequence to Sequence model, resulting in significant performance improvements. They introduce several structural enhancements, including the utilization of word piece models instead of graphemes
and the incorporation of a multi-head attention architecture, which outperforms the commonly used single-head attention mechanism. Additionally,
they investigate optimization techniques such as synchronous training, scheduled sampling, label smoothing, and minimum word error rate optimization,
all of which demonstrate improvements in accuracy. The authors present
experimental results utilizing a unidirectional LSTM encoder for streaming
recognition. On a 12,500-hour voice search task, they observe a decrease in
Word Error Rate (WER) from 9.2% to 5.6% with the proposed changes, while
the best-performing conventional system achieves a WER of 6.7%. Moreover, on a dictation task, their model achieves a WER of 4.1%, compared
51

to 5% for the conventional system. Similarly, the work of Prabhavalkar et
al. [212] investigated a number of sequence-to-sequence methods in automatic speech recognition. These included the RNN transducer (RNN-T),
attention-based models, a new model that augments the RNN-T with attention, and a Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) trained system that
directly outputs grapheme sequences. According to their research, sequenceto-sequence approaches can compete on dictation test sets against state-ofthe-art when trained on a large volume of training data. Even though deep
learning has achieved state-of-the-art in speech recognition, an area that still
calls for attention is speech-to-speech translation. This is because the present
deep learning based speech-to-speech translation systems operate by translating sentences individually, disregarding any contextual information from
preceding sentences. While research on contextual understanding has been
ongoing for years, challenges persist regarding its practicality and processing efficiency, since translation typically relies on the surrounding words for
context.
4.3.3. Finance
Over the past few decades, computational intelligence in finance has been
a hot issue in both academia and the financial sector [221]. Deep learning,
especially RNN models have gained significant traction in the field of finance
due to its ability to handle sequential data, since financial data often exhibit
sequential dependencies, such as time series data for stock prices or historical
transaction data. Within the financial industry, researchers have developed
deep learning models for stock market forecasting [176], algorithmic trading
[178], credit risk assessment [222], portfolio allocation [223], asset pricing
[224], and derivatives markets [225], among others and these models are
intended to offer real-time operational solutions. In exchange rate prediction,
Sun et al. [226] developed an ensemble deep learning technique known as
LSTM-B by combining a bagging ensemble learning algorithm with a longshort term memory (LSTM) neural network to increase the profitability of
exchange rate trading and produce accurate exchange rate forecasting results.
In comparison to previous methodologies, the authors’ estimates proved to
be more accurate when they looked at the potential financial profitability of
exchange rates between the US dollar (USD) and four other major currencies:
GBP, JPY, EUR, and CNY.
The authors in [227] proposed a Bi-LSTM-BR technique, which combined Bagging Ridge (BR) regression with Bi-LSTM as base regressors. The
52

pre-COVID-19 and COVID-19 exchange rates of 21 currencies against the
USD were predicted using the Bi-LSTM BR, and experiments showed that
the proposed method outperformed ML algorithms such as DT and SVM.
However, exchange rate data can be noisy and subject to non-stationarity,
which can pose challenges for predictive modelling. While bagging techniques
can help mitigate the effects of noise to some extent, they may struggle to
capture long-term trends or sudden shifts in the data distribution, leading
to suboptimal performance. To address this, Wang et al. [228] presented
an approach for one-day ahead of time exchange rate prediction that concurrently considers both supervised and unsupervised deep representation
features to enhance Random Subspace. Two crucial phases in the SUDFRS technique are feature extraction and model building. First, LSTM and
deep belief networks, respectively, extract the supervised and unsupervised
deep representation features. To produce high-quality feature subsets, an
enhanced random subspace approach was created that integrates a random
forest-based feature weighting mechanism. Then, the matching base learner
is trained using each feature subset, and the final outcomes are generated
by averaging the outcomes of each base learner. Experiments on EUR/USD,
GBP/USD and USD/JPY showed that improved accuracy was achieved using the model.
In stock market prediction, several deep learning architectures have been
proposed in the literature. For instance, [229], conducted a comparative
study between the ANN, SVR, RF and an LSTM model. As compared to
the other models discussed in the study, the LSTM model outperformed the
others in predicting the closing prices of iShares MSCI United Kingdom.
Similarly, using stock market historical data and financial news, Cai et al.
[230] used CNN and LSTM forecasting methods to generate seven prediction models. The seven models were then combined into a single ensemble
model in accordance with the ensemble learning approach to create an aggregated model. However, the accuracy of all the models’ predictions was
low. Gudelek et al. [231] proposed a CNN model which used a sliding window technique and created pictures by capturing daily snapshots within the
window’s bounds. With 72% accuracy, the model was able to forecast the
prices for the following day and was able to generate 5 times the starting
capital. In Eapen et al. [232], a CNN and Bi-LSTM model with numerous
pipelines was proposed, utilising an SVM regressor model on the S&P 500
Grand Challenge dataset, and results showed enhanced prediction performance by over a factor of 6% compared to baseline models. As presented,
53

deep learning has undeniably achieved state-of-the-art performance across
various domains within finance.
4.3.4. Electrocardiogram (ECG) Classification
Disorders pertaining to the heart or blood vessels are collectively referred
to as Cardiovascular Diseases (CVD) [233]. According to the American Heart
Association’s 2023 statistics, CVD has emerged as the leading cause of death
worldwide. In 2020, 19.05 million deaths were recorded from CVD globally, which signifies an increase of 18.71% from 2010, and it is believed that
this number will rise to 23.6 million by 2030 [234]. Blood clots and vascular blockages caused by CVDs can cause myocardial infarction, stroke or
even death [233]. Generally, early diagnosis has been shown to reduce the
mortality rate of CVDs, and Electrocardiogram (ECG) signals play a crucial
role in diagnosing various cardiac abnormalities and monitoring heart health.
However, ECG signal has characteristics of high noise and high complexity,
making it time-consuming and labor-intensive to identify certain diseases using traditional methods. The traditional approach is tedious and requires
the expertise of a medical specialist. Over the past decades, the task of
Long-term ECG recording classification has been significantly facilitated for
cardiologists through the adoption of computerized ECG recognition practices. Throughout this period, feature extraction methods have predominantly relied on manual techniques, encompassing diverse approaches such
as wave shape functions [235], wavelet-based features [236], ECG morphology [237], hermite polynomials [238], and Karhunen-Loeve expansion of ECG
morphology [239], among others. These extracted features are subsequently
subjected to classification using various machine learning algorithms.
More recently, the advent of deep learning has revolutionized the field
by enabling automatic feature learning directly from ECG signals. This
advancement holds significant promise in the realm of automated ECG classification, offering clinicians a tool for swift and accurate diagnosis. Based on
this, several deep learning architectures have been proposed for feature learning of ECG signals. For instance, Acharya et al. [240] developed a 9-layer
CNN model to automatically identify five categories of heartbeats in ECG
signals. A similar model was also developed in [241], However, ECG signals
often vary significantly in length, as they may contain different numbers of
heartbeats. CNNs typically require fixed-length inputs, which may necessitate preprocessing steps such as padding or truncation, potentially losing
important temporal information. For this reason, several architectures have
54

leveraged RNN in ECG classification, as seen in [242], [243] and [244], among
others. While RNNs are capable of handling sequential data, they also have
limitations in capturing local patterns or short-term dependencies effectively.
In ECG signals, local features such as specific waveforms or intervals can be
crucial for classification. For this reason, recent works have proposed hybrid
models which combine the strengths of both CNNs and RNNs to overcome
some of these limitations [245].
The work of Rai et al. [246] developed a hybrid CNN-LSTM network
to evaluate the optimum performing model for myocardial infarction detection using ECG signals. The authors then experimented on 123,998 ECG
beats obtained from the PTB diagnostic database (PTBDB) and MIT-BIH
arrhythmia database (MITDB), and the result showed that by combining the
capabilities of both CNN and LSTM, improved classification accuracy can be
achieved. Also, in [247], a CNN architecture was developed to extract morphological features from ECG signals. For the purpose of determining the
degree of heart rate variability, another composite structure was designed using LSTM and a collection of manually created statistical features. Following
that, a hybrid CNN-LSTM architecture is built using the two independent
biomarkers to classify cardiovascular artery diseases, and experiments were
carried out on two distinct datasets. The first is a partly noisy in-house
dataset collected using an inexpensive ECG sensor, and the other is a corpus
taken from the MIMIC II waveform dataset. The hybrid model proposed in
the work achieved an overall classification accuracy of 88% and 93%, respectively, which surpasses the performance of standalone architectures.
An automated diagnosis method based on Deep CNN and LSTM architecture was presented in [248] to identify Congestive Heart Failure (CHF)
from ECG signals. Specifically, CNN was used to extract deep features, and
LSTM was employed to exploit the extracted features to achieve the CHF
detection goal. The model was tested using real-time ECG signal datasets,
and the results showed that the AUC was 99.9%, the sensitivity was 99.31%,
the specificity was 99.28%, the F-Score was 98.94%, and the accuracy was
99.52%. However, since ECG signals can vary in length due to differences in
recording durations or patient conditions. LSTMs are capable of handling
variable-length sequences, but traditional CNNs typically require fixed-length
inputs. Therefore, fusing these features effectively in a hybrid model can be
challenging. Also, Hybrid CNN-RNN models can be computationally intensive, especially when processing long ECG sequences or large datasets.
For this reason, recent research works have proposed the use of attention
55

mechanisms to reduce the computational burden by enabling the model to
selectively attend to informative features, focusing computational resources
where they are most needed. Likewise, attention mechanisms can enable the
model to attend to informative segments of the ECG signal, regardless of their
length, allowing for more flexible processing of variable-length sequences.
Several researchers have leveraged attention mechanisms in standalone
and hybrid architectures for improved performance. For instance, in the
work of Chun-Yen et al. [249], CNN layers were used to extract main features, while LSTM and attention were included to enhance the model’s feature learning capabilities. Experiments on a 12-lead KMUH ECG dataset
showed that the model had high recognition rates in classifying normal and
abnormal ECG signals, compared to hybrid models without attention mechanisms. Wang et al. [250] presented a 33-layer CNN architecture with nonlocal convolutional block attention module (NCBAM). To extract the spatial and channel information, preprocessed ECG signals were first fed into
the CNN architecture. A non-local attention further captured long-range
dependencies of representative features along spatial and channel axes. Similarly, a spatio-temporal attention-based convolutional recurrent neural network (STA-CRNN) was presented in [251] with the aim of concentrating on
representative features in both the spatial and temporal dimensions. The
CNN subnetwork, spatiotemporal attention modules, and RNN subnetwork
made up the STA-CRNN and according to findings, the STA-CRNN model
was able to classify eight different forms of arrhythmias and normal rhythm
with an average F1 score of 0.835.
Combining hybrid deep learning models with attention mechanisms for
ECG feature learning is a promising approach that has already shown potential in ECG feature learning, according to reviewed literature. Future research can further explore semi-supervised and self-supervised learning techniques to leverage large amounts of unlabeled ECG data. This could involve
pre-training models on large-scale unlabeled datasets using self-supervised
learning objectives. Also, deep learning models have been leveraged in the
generation of synthetic ECG signals to augment real signals, as seen in [252]
where a GAN model was developed to generate ECG signals that correspond
with available clinical data. The GAN model used two layers of BiLSTM
networks for the generator and CNN for the discriminator, and trained using the 48 ECG recordings of different users from the MIT-BIH dataset.
The authors then compared their model with a Recurrent neural network
autoencoder (RNN-AE) model and a recurrent neural network variational
56

autoencoder (RNN-VAE) model, and the results showed that their model
exhibited the fastest convergence of its loss function to zero.
4.3.5. Electroencephalography (EEG) Classification
Three-dimensional scalp surface electrode readings provide a dynamic
time series that is called Electroencephalogram (EEG) signal [253]. Brain
waves obtained from an EEG can effectively depict both the psychological
and pathological states of a human. The human brain is acknowledged to
be a fascinating and incredibly complicated structure. Numerous brain signals, including functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), near-infrared
spectroscopy (NIRS), electroencephalograms (EEGs), and functional nearinfrared spectroscopy (fNIR), among others have been collected and used to
study the brain [254]. Due to the EEG’s non-invasive, affordable, accessible, and excellent temporal resolution characteristics, it has become the most
utilised approach. However, the signal-to-noise ratio of EEG signal is low,
meaning that sources with no task-relevant information frequently have a
stronger effect on the EEG signal than those that do. These characteristics often make end-to-end feature learning for EEG data substantially more
challenging [253]. Based on this, several methods have been leveraged for
improved feature extraction in EEG signals across several domains including
Motor imagery [255], anxiety disorder [256], epileptic seizure detection [257],
sleep pattern analysis and disorder detection [258, 259], and Alzheimer’s disease detection [260], and many others.
EEG Motor Imagery (MI) is a technique used to study brain activity associated with the imagination of movement. It involves recording electrical
activity generated by the brain through electrodes placed on the scalp. MI
tasks typically involve imagining performing a specific motor action, such as
moving a hand or foot, without physically executing the movement, and has
been leveraged in smart healthcare applications such as post-stroke rehabilitation and mobile assistive robots, among others [261]. Prior to the advent
of deep learning, motor imagery EEG data are passed through various steps
before classification using traditional ML techniques. Pre-processing, feature
extraction, and classification are the three primary stages that traditional
approaches usually take while processing MI-EEG signals. Pre-processing includes a number of operations, including signal filtering (choosing the most
valuable frequency range for MI tasks), channel selection (identifying the
most valuable EEG channels for MI tasks), signal normalisation (normalising each EEG channel around the time axis), and artefact removal (remov57

ing noise from MI-EEG signals). Independent component analysis (ICA) is
the most often utilised technique for removing artefacts [262, 263, 264]. In
contrast to the traditional approach, deep learning architectures can automatically extract complex features from raw MI-EEG data without the need
for laborious feature extraction and pre-processing. Based on this, several
deep learning architectures have been proposed for MI-EEG feature learning,
as seen in [265], [266] and [267], among others. For instance [253], categorized MI-EEG signals using three CNNs with varying architectures, and the
number of convolutional layers varied from two layers to a five-layer deep
ConvNet to a thirty-one-layer residual network.
In Dai et al. [268], the authors proposed an approach for classifying MIEEG signals which blend variational autoencoder with CNN architecture.
The VAE decoder was used to fit the Gaussian distribution of EEG signals,
and the time, frequency, and channel information from the EEG signal were
combined to create a novel representation of input, and the proposed CNNVAE method was optimised for the input. Experiments showed that by combining both deep learning architectures, improved features were learnt, which
led to a high classification performance on the BCI Competition IV dataset
2b. Li et al. [269] employed optimal wavelet packet transform (OWPT) for
the generation of feature vectors from MI-EEG signals. These vectors were
then utilized to train an LSTM network which demonstrated satisfactory
performance on dataset III from the BCI Competition 2003. However, the
model has excessively intricate structure. To address this, Feng et al. [270]
introduced a technique that merges continuous wavelet transform (CWT)
with a simplified convolutional neural network to enhance the accuracy of
recognizing MI-EEG signals. By employing CWT, MI-EEG signals were converted into time-frequency image representations. Subsequently, these image
representations were fed into the SCNN for feature extraction and classification. Experiments on the BCI Competition IV Dataset 2b demonstrate that,
on average, the classification accuracy across nine subjects reached 83.2%.
However, the computational complexity of the model was quite high, due to
the processing of time-frequency image representations. The conversion of
MI-EEG signals into time-frequency images using CWT requires significant
computational resources.
The authors in [271] introduced a classification framework based on Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to improve the accuracy of classifying four-class
motor imagery signals from EEG. The authors sliding window technique to
capture time-varying EEG signal data, and employed an overlapping-band58

based Filter Bank Common Spatial Patterns (FBCSP) method to extract
subject-specific spatial features. Experiments on the BCI Competition IV
dataset 2a, showed that their model achieved an average accuracy of 97%,
compared to existing methods. Also, in the classification of Alzheimer’s disease, Zhao et al. [272] employed a deep learning network to analyse EEG
data. The deep learning model was evaluated on a dataset that consist of
fifteen (15) patients with clinically confirmed Alzheimer’s disease and fifteen (15) healthy individuals, and results showed that improved features
were learnt and compared the results to the traditional methods. This has
prompted the use of deep learning in Alzheimer’s disease detection, as seen
in [273], where the authors used CNN for diagnosing Alzheimer’s Disease.
To address challenges posed by limited data and overfitting in deep learning
models designed for Alzheimer’s Disease detection, the authors explored the
use of overlapping sliding windows to augment the EEG data collected from
100 subjects (comprising 49 AD patients, 37 mild cognitive impairment patients, and 14 healthy controls subjects). After assembling the augmented
dataset, a modified Deep Pyramid Convolutional Neural Network (DPCNN)
was used to classify the enhanced EEG signals. In epilepsy detection, [274]
developed three deep learning architectures (CNN, LSTM, and hybrid CNNLSTM), with each model chosen for its effectiveness in handling the intricate
characteristics of EEG data. Each architecture offers distinct advantages,
with CNN excelling in spatial feature extraction, LSTM in capturing temporal dynamics, and the hybrid model combining these strengths. The CNN
model, consisting of 31 layers, attained the highest accuracy, achieving 91%
on the first benchmark dataset and 82% on the second dataset using a 30second threshold, selected for its clinical significance.
In the work of Abdulwahhab et al. [275], EEG waves’ time-frequency
image and raw EEG waves served as input elements for CNN and LSTM
models. Two signal processing methods, namely Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and CWT, were employed to generate spectrogram and scalogram images, sized at 77 × 75 and 32 × 32, respectively. The experimental
findings demonstrated detection accuracies of 99.57% and 99.26% for CNN
inputs using CWT Scalograms on the Bonn University dataset and 99.57%
and 97.12% using STFT spectrograms on the CHB-MIT dataset. Similarly,
in emotion recognition, several deep learning models have been leveraged
with EEG signals. For instance, in [276], a subject-independent emotion
recognition model was proposed, which utilizes Variational Mode Decomposition (VMD) for feature extraction and DNN as the classifier. Evaluation
59

against the benchmark DEAP dataset demonstrates superior performance of
this approach compared to other techniques in subject-independent emotion
recognition from EEG signals. Also, some researchers have also combined
EEG signals with facial expression and speech in emotion recognition, as
seen in [277], [278], and [279], among others. However, EEG signals can vary
significantly across individuals, making it challenging to generalize models
across different subjects.
5. Research Challenges
5.1. Availability and Quality
Building and employing deep learning models face several challenges. The
training of deep learning requires a large number of instances (examples) to
achieve high accuracy and generalization [280]. Furthermore, the complexity
of deep neural networks may lead to overfitting, where the model performs
well on training data but fails to generalize on new, unseen data. This phenomenon frequently arises when the models is trained on insufficient data,
highlighting the importance of diverse and extensive datasets. However, the
data collection and annotation are time consuming and often require domain
experts, specialized training and standardization [281]. Moreover, this process is prone to error and has the risk of introducing biases into the dataset
which can significantly impact the performance of the trained model. One
of the approaches to address this issue is transfer learning. Transfer learning
involves the use of a deep learning model (known as pre-trained model) that
is trained on a large dataset for solving a specific task (with a small dataset)
[282]. The pre-trained model serves as a basis for the model training by
fine-tuning the weights of the pre-trained model and adapting it to the new
prediction task. This approach helps to mitigate the lack of training data
in the target domain. Furthermore, transfer learning reduces computational
resources required to train the model and helps faster convergence.
Another approach that can be employed to address the lack of data is data
augmentation. Data augmentation is a convenient method that increases the
number of instances by performing transformation functions on the existing
instances without changing the labels [283]. In the domain of computer vision, image transformation such as rotation, translation and cropping. However, it is important to consider the output of the transformation because the
resultant may not represent the actual data. For example, flipping or adding
noise to a signal may introduce distortion or changing the characteristics
60

(trend, seasonality and cyclic variations) of the signal. Thus, careful consideration must be given to ensure that the generated instances still accurately
represent the underlying patterns present in the data. Data augmentation
can also be realized by generating synthetic data to supplement the training
set. Synthetic data is artificially created data that resembles real data but
is generated using statistical methods or deep generative models [284, 285].
The generated data can complement the less-diverse, limited datasets, providing a broader range of examples for the model to learn from. However,
generating synthetic data that accurately reflects the characteristics of the
real-world data is challenging. Careful consideration must be given to the
choice of models and parameters used to ensure the synthetic data is realistic
and representative of the real-world data.
5.2. Interpretability and Explainability
Interpretability and explainability is crucial for building trust and understanding how predictive models make decisions especially in high-stake
applications such as healthcare and medical image analysis [286]. However,
as deep learning models become more intricate and complex with numerous layers, subnetworks and a large number of parameters, the models are
often perceived as a “black box” and difficult to explain in terms of decisionmaking processes. Therefore, it is crucial for the researchers to focus on
methods that provide insights into how a deep learning model performs the
prediction and how its decisions are influenced by the input data, making it
more transparent and trustworthy. Numerous methods have been proposed
for interpreting and explaining the decisions of deep learning models which
can be categorized into visualization (feature attribution), model distillation
and intrinsic (explainable by itself). Visualization methods involve the use
of scientific visualization such as saliency maps or heatmaps to express the
explanation by highlighting the degree of association between the inputs and
the predictions [287]. The heatmaps identify the saliency of the input features
influencing the model’s predictions. The visualization approach is simple and
intuitive and can be applied to tabular data and image data. Furthermore,
it can be used to identify and debug issues in deep learning models, leading
to improved performance and robustness.
Model distillation is an approach to approximating a complex model by
fitting a simpler model using the training set. The simpler model is built
typically using a simpler or interpretable algorithm such as linear regression,
decision tree or rule-based methods [288]. In this approach, the simpler model
61

is trained to resemble the predictive behavior of the complex model. Then,
the simpler model may serve as the proxy or surrogate model for explaining
the complex model. Model distillation can be used together with visualization to further enhance the interpretability of the complex model [289].
Model distillation seeks explanations of the models that were never designed
to be explainable. Ideally, the explanation of a deep learning model’s prediction should be included as part of the model output, or the explanation can
be derived from the architecture of the model. This is because an intrinsic
model can learn not only the mapping between the input and output, but
also generate an explanation of the prediction that is faithful to the model’s
behavior. Attention mechanisms are the key to this approach, providing a
form of attention weights that can be used to explain why the model made
a particular decision [290]. Another type of intrinsic approach is to train
the model to simultaneously perform the prediction task and generate the
explanation for its predictions [291]. This “additional task” can be in the
form of a text explanation or model prototype which embeds the semantic
meaning of the prediction. However, the intrinsic approach is more difficult
to apply because the user needs additional knowledge and understanding of
the model’s architecture and inner workings.
5.3. Ethics and Fairness
Deep learning models are increasingly being deployed in making highstake decision including recruitment [292], criminal justice [293] and credit
scoring [294]. There are several advantages of deep learning-based systems
in which, unlike humans, machines are able to process vast amounts of data
and applications quickly and consistently. However, deep learning-based systems have the risk of being prone to biases present in the data used for
training which can lead to unfairness and injustice. Numerous efforts have
been made to mitigate this issue which can be categorized into modelling
bias detection and modelling bias mitigation. Detection of modelling bias
refers to the process of identifying and quantifying biases that may present
in predictive models. This approach involves the use of statistical analysis,
fairness metrics, counterfactual testing and human review to detect bias in
the models. For instance, visualization-based methods such as attribution
maps are used to indicate which regions are significant to the predictions
[295]. This in turn can be used to detect and quantify bias using metrics
such as Relevance Mass Accuracy, Relevance Rank Accuracy Accuracy and
or Area over the perturbation curve (AOPC). In [296], two modules are pre62

sented for estimating bias in predictive models. The first module utilizes an
unsupervised deep neural network with a custom loss function to generate
hidden representation of the input data called bias vectors, revealing the underlying bias of each feature. The second module combines these bias vectors
into a single vector representing the bias estimation of each feature, achieved
by aggregating them using the absolute averaging operation. Bias mitigation
refers to the process of reducing the presence of bias in predictive models,
which can be done in three stages. The first stage combats bias by modifying
the training data, either relabeling the labels or perturbing the feature values
[297, 298]. The second stage addresses bias during the training of the model
by applying regularization terms to the loss function to penalize discrimination. In [299], a loss function based on bias parity score (BPS) is introduced
to measure the degree of similarity of a statistical measure such as accuracy
across different subgroups. The BPS term is added to the loss function as
a regularizer to the original prediction task. The last stage mitigates bias
after the predictive models have been successfully trained. This stage applies
post-processing approaches such as reinforcement learning to obtain a fairer
model [300]. For instance, the detection of minority classes is rewarded to
prevent bias towards the majority class. This allows the model the generalize
well across different patient demographics.
5.4. Lightweight Deep Learning Models
Even though deep learning architectures have achieved state-of-the-art
across various computer vision tasks, they often come with large model parameters [197]. The architecture and complexity of a deep learning network
determine the number of model parameters. The deeper the network, the
larger the number of model parameters. However, deep learning models with
large parameters often suffer limitations when deploying on end devices. For
instance, a deep learning model developed for security monitoring by analyzing video data using 3D-CNNs might suffer deployment issues when deploying
such models on low-resourced systems like smartphones or small-scale IoT
devices. Model training and inference for deep learning models with large
parameters demands substantial processing power. As the number of parameters increases, so does the computational complexity, resulting in longer
model training duration and more hardware needs. Also, large parameter
sizes translate to increased memory requirements, limiting their deployment
on end devices. This is because these end devices often have battery, processor or memory capacity limitations. To address these challenges, it is
63

important to develop sophisticated but lightweight architectures that can
achieve state-of-the-art with few model parameters. Such lightweight models will be characterized by their ability to deliver competitive performance
while mitigating computational complexity and memory requirements, making them well-suited for deployment on resource-constrained devices. An
approach would be to develop novel lightweight plug-and-play modules that
can be plugged to few layered deep learning architectures to improve feature
learning without incurring additional model complexity. Other approaches
could involve leveraging model compression techniques to reduce the size
and computational complexity of deep learning models. Researchers can focus on improving pruning methods [301], which can identify and eliminate
redundant parameters or connections, thereby reducing the model’s footprint
without compromising performance. Also, quantization techniques [302] can
be further explored to reduce the precision of weights and activations, therefore, enabling efficient representation with lower memory requirements. Also,
knowledge distillation techniques [303] can be further investigated to facilitate the transfer of knowledge from a complex teacher model to a simpler student model, therefore, enabling compact yet effective representations. These
areas are still open to contributions.
5.5. Adversarial Attack and Defense
Adversarial attacks and defense mechanisms in deep learning represent
a critical area of research and development, particularly as deep learning
models become increasingly integrated into various applications. Adversarial attacks involves the deliberate manipulation of input data to mislead or
deceive deep learning models, leading to incorrect predictions or behavior
[304]. Szegedy et al. [305] was the first to identify this intriguing shortcoming of deep neural networks in image classification. They showed that even
with their great accuracy, deep learning models are surprisingly vulnerable
to adversarial attacks that take the form of tiny image changes that are (almost) invisible to human vision systems. A neural network classifier may
radically alter its prediction about an image as a result of such an attack.
Also, such a model can indicate high confidence in wrong predictions, which
can be catastrophic for deep learning models deployed in medical or security fields, among many others. In generative models, several studies have
investigated how adversarial attacks affect autoencoders and GANs, as seen
in Tabacof et al. [306] where a method to manipulate input images in a way
that deceives variational autoencoders into reconstructing a totally different
64

image was introduced. In recent times, the focus of adversarial attack research has been on images, but studies has shown that adversarial attacks
are not limited to image data; they can also affect other types of data such
as text, signals, audio, and video [307, 308, 309].
6. Summary and Future Directions
We have discussed the state-of-the-art applications and challenges of deep
learning in computer vision, natural language processing and time series analysis. In this section, we summarize the advancements made which can be
grouped into model architecture, contextual enhancement, and loss function
and optimization. Finally, we discuss possible future works in these domains.
Model Architecture: The recent advancements in computer vision focus on vision transformers (ViT) for scalable representation learning [18]. In
image classification and image segmentation, ViTs are utilized to capture
global context and relationships between different parts of an image, while
in object detection, ViTs are used to streamline the detection process by
eliminating the traditional components like anchor boxes and non-maximum
suppression [? ]. However, ViTs lack the ability to exploit local spatial
features and struggle with hyperparameter sensitivity and performance on
smaller datasets. To address this issue, researchers have developed hybrid
deep learning architectures such as conformer [90] and MaxViT [91] that
combine both transformers and convolutional neural networks to capture
both local and global features. Similar trend is observed in modern natural language processing whereby the basis of the deep learning models is
transformer architectures such as BERT [141] and its variants to achieve remarkable accuracy in tasks such as text classification, machine translation
and text generation.
While recent advancements in computer vision and natural language processing have predominantly relied on transformer architectures, the field of
time series analysis focuses on a different trajectory. Notably, areas such as
human activity recognition, speech recognition and financial prediction have
seen significant progress through the development of hybrid architectures
that do not depend on transformers. Instead, these advancements leverage
recurrent neural networks and convolutional neural networks, often incorporating attention mechanisms. The hybrid architectures allow the models to
capture both local features and temporal dependencies in the data, which
is crucial for time series analysis [196? ]. Similar trends can be observed
65

in ECG and EEG classification whereby not only convolutional and recurrent neural networks are used, but also generative models such as variational
autoencoder [268] and generative adversarial network to generate data to
address challenges posed by limited datasets and overfitting [252]. The generator of the generative model is composed of layers of BiLSTM, while the
discriminator is composed of convolutional neural networks.
Contextual Enhancement: Recent advancements in text classification focus on capturing contextual information utilizing approaches such as
joint embeddings of labels [148] and words as well as aspect-aware methods
that enhance feature extraction [150]. Conversely, in machine translation,
although transformers have proven effective, they often struggle to capture
nuanced language features and contexts. To address this issue, various strategies have been introduced such as concatenating contextual sentences and
context-sensitive training [158, 159]. In image generation, the researchers focus on improving the quality and relevance of generated images by enhancing
the alignment between input text and images, while also addressing issues
like fuzzy shapes and diversity through innovative deep learning architectures such as incorporating attention mechanisms and fusion modules into
the model. Furthermore, recent models like DF-GAN [130] and DMF-GAN
[131] showcase a shift towards single-stage generators with regularization
strategies that maintain details while enhancing diversity. In text generation, BERT and its variants are the basis of the deep learning models. The
research focuses on hierarchical architectures, capturing long text dependencies [171] and leveraging domain knowledge through label sequence [172] and
conversation sequence [168] to bridge semantic gaps. Overall, the advancements show a clear trend toward improving contextual awareness and feature
representation.
Loss Function and Optimization: Researchers are increasingly focused on refining loss functions to improve classification accuracy. For instance, in image classification, some studies introduce additive terms to the
cross-entropy loss to reward well-classified instances [82], while others propose asymmetric polynomial loss functions that prioritize positive instances
to tackle class imbalance [83] and adaptive loss function that dynamically
adjust the weights assigned to class-level components based on model performance [310]. Another approach to address class imbalanced is data augmentation through generating virtual samples [311], oversampling with targetaware autoencoders for estimating target values for new features [312]. In
time series analysis, similar approach has been proposed such as penalizing
66

misclassification of minority classes [313], maximizing the minimum recall
of the classes [314]. Improved training strategies have been proposed to address class imbalanced data such as iteratively selecting the most informative
instances [315] and contrastive learning to keep the instances of each finegrained clusters away from the minority class [316].
Future Directions: Looking ahead, the future of deep learning presents
numerous opportunities for growth and innovation. Future models could
explore non-sequential hybrid architectures of transformer and convolutional
neural networks to leverage the strengths of both approaches, enhancing performance in image classification, object detection and image segmentation.
Furthermore, researchers could investigate simpler or lightweight architectures and new training schemes to address the long training time associated with transformers. Future research in image generation may explore
advanced frameworks or architectures that further integrate semantic understanding, perhaps by employing hierarchical attention modules and/or
fusion modules to capture both local and global features more effectively.
Additionally, incorporating unsupervised learning or self-supervised learning approaches could reduce reliance on labeled datasets, allowing models to
learn from a diverse range of inputs. In the area of natural language processing, future research in text classification and machine translation could
explore the integration of external knowledge bases and domain-specific embeddings may further improve context understanding and label alignment.
Additionally, refining context incorporation methods such as dynamic context updating during translation may enhance the model performance.
Future research in image generation may explore advanced frameworks
or architectures that further integrate semantic understanding, perhaps by
employing hierarchical attention modules and/or fusion modules to capture
both local and global features more effectively. Additionally, incorporating
unsupervised learning or self-supervised learning approaches could reduce reliance on labeled datasets, allowing models to learn from a diverse range of
inputs. In text generation, advancing towards more interactive and adaptive systems that can maintain context over extended dialogues and narratives is crucial. Furthermore, frameworks that can leverage multi-modalities
(text, audio and visual) for richer contextual understanding may facilitate
the development of more advanced applications across these domains. Future research can also focus on exploring adversarial attacks in these domains
and developing tailored defence mechanisms. Also, researchers can further
investigate the practical implications of adversarial attacks in real-world sce67

narios, such as in autonomous vehicles and medical imaging. Understanding
the potential impact of adversarial attacks in these applications can inform
the development of more robust and secure systems.
Due to the sensitive nature of financial research, future work can focus
on enhancing the interpretability of deep learning models in financial predictions. Researchers should explore techniques to explain the predictions
of models, to improve trust and understanding of model decisions, which is
essential for adoption in human activity recognition, speech recognition and
finance. Furthermore, future models could explore the use of transformers to
enhance feature representation for time series analysis. Future research can
also incorporate attention mechanisms into hybrid generative model architectures to improve the quality of generated signals. Additionally, real-time
processing capabilities are paramount, future work can develop efficient algorithms for real-time processing of ECG and EEG signals. This could involve optimizing existing architectures and leveraging hardware acceleration
techniques to enable real-time inference on resource-constrained devices such
as wearable sensors and implantable devices. Future models could explore
methods for adapting or personalizing models to account for inter-subject
variability and improve performance on individual subjects. Also, EEG electrodes cover only a fraction of the brain’s surface, resulting in limited coverage of neural activity. Deep learning models could investigate strategies to
infer activity from unobserved brain regions or integrate information from
multiple modalities to provide more comprehensive coverage. These areas
can still be further explored.
7. Conclusion
Deep learning has become the prominent data-driven approach in various
state-of-the-art applications. Its importance lies in its ability to revolutionize many aspects of research and industries and tackle complex problems
which were once impossible to overcome. Numerous surveys have been published on deep learning, reviewing the concepts, model architectures and
applications. However, the studies do not discuss the emerging trends in the
state-of-the-art applications of deep learning and emphasize the important
traits and elements in the models. This paper presents a structured and
comprehensive survey of deep learning, focusing on the latest trends and advancements in state-of-the-art applications such as computer vision, natural
language processing, time series analysis and pervasive computing. It ex68

plores key elements and traits in modern deep learning models, highlighting
their significance in addressing complex challenges across diverse domains.
The discussion also covers future research directions in advancing these fields.
Furthermore, this paper presents a comprehensive review of the deep learning
fundamentals, which is essential for understanding the core principles behind
modern deep learning models. The survey finishes by discussing the critical
challenges and future directions in deep learning.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported in part by the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia for Fundamental Research Grant Scheme with Project Code:
FRGS/1/2023/ICT02/USM/02/2.
Statements and Declarations
• Funding This work was supported by the Ministry of Higher Education
Malaysia (FRGS/1/2023/ICT02/USM/02/2).
• Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
• Ethics approval Not applicable.
• Availability of Data and Materials No data was used for the research described in the article.
Appendix text.
References
[1] S. Shamshirband, M. Fathi, A. Dehzangi, A. T. Chronopoulos,
H. Alinejad-Rokny, A review on deep learning approaches in healthcare systems: Taxonomies, challenges, and open issues 113 103627.
doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103627.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1532046420302550

69

[2] J. Wang, Y. Ma, L. Zhang, R. X. Gao, D. Wu, Deep learning
for smart manufacturing: Methods and applications 48 144–156.
doi:10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.01.003.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0278612518300037
[3] H. A. Pierson, M. S. Gashler, Deep learning in robotics: a review of recent research 31 (16) 821–835, publisher: Taylor & Francis eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864.2017.1365009. doi:10.
1080/01691864.2017.1365009.
URL https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864.2017.1365009
[4] P. Dixit, S. Silakari, Deep Learning Algorithms for Cybersecurity Applications: A Technological and Status Review 39 100317.
doi:10.1016/j.cosrev.2020.100317.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1574013720304172
[5] S. Dong, P. Wang, K. Abbas, A survey on deep learning and its applications 40 100379, publisher: Elsevier.
[6] T. Talaei Khoei, H. Ould Slimane, N. Kaabouch, Deep learning: Systematic review, models, challenges, and research directions 35 (31)
23103–23124, publisher: Springer.
[7] L. Alzubaidi, J. Zhang, A. J. Humaidi, A. Al-Dujaili, Y. Duan, O. AlShamma, J. Santamaria, M. A. Fadhel, M. Al-Amidie, L. Farhan, Review of deep learning: concepts, CNN architectures, challenges, applications, future directions 8 1–74, publisher: Springer.
[8] M. Z. Alom, T. M. Taha, C. Yakopcic, S. Westberg, P. Sidike, M. S.
Nasrin, M. Hasan, B. C. Van Essen, A. A. Awwal, V. K. Asari, A
state-of-the-art survey on deep learning theory and architectures 8 (3)
292, publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[9] S. Pouyanfar, S. Sadiq, Y. Yan, H. Tian, Y. Tao, M. P. Reyes, M.-L.
Shyu, S.-C. Chen, S. S. Iyengar, A survey on deep learning: Algorithms,
techniques, and applications 51 (5) 1–36, publisher: ACM New York,
NY, USA.

70

[10] I. H. Sarker, Deep learning: a comprehensive overview on techniques,
taxonomy, applications and research directions 2 (6) 420, publisher:
Springer.
[11] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, G. Hinton, Deep learning 521 (7553) 436–444,
number: 7553 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. doi:10.1038/
nature14539.
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/nature14539
[12] J. Hu, L. Shen, S. Albanie, G. Sun, E. Wu, Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks, arXiv:1709.01507 [cs] version: 4. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1709.
01507.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.01507
[13] Z. Gao, J. Xie, Q. Wang, P. Li, Global Second-order Pooling Convolutional Networks, arXiv:1811.12006 [cs] version: 2. doi:10.48550/
arXiv.1811.12006.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.12006
[14] Q. Wang, B. Wu, P. Zhu, P. Li, W. Zuo, Q. Hu, ECA-Net: Efficient Channel Attention for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,
arXiv:1910.03151 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1910.03151.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03151
[15] Z. Liu, L. Wang, W. Wu, C. Qian, T. Lu, TAM: Temporal Adaptive
Module for Video Recognition, arXiv:2005.06803 [cs]. doi:10.48550/
arXiv.2005.06803.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.06803
[16] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, L. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention Is All You Need,
arXiv:1706.03762 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1706.03762.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
[17] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L. L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Misawa, K. Mori, S. McDonagh, N. Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz, B. Glocker,
D. Rueckert, Attention U-Net: Learning Where to Look for the Pancreas, arXiv:1804.03999 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1804.03999.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03999

71

[18] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly,
J. Uszkoreit, N. Houlsby, An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale, arXiv:2010.11929 [cs]. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2010.11929.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929
[19] M.-H. Guo, Z.-N. Liu, T.-J. Mu, S.-M. Hu, Beyond Self-Attention:
External Attention Using Two Linear Layers for Visual Tasks 45 (5)
5436–5447, conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3211006.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9912362
[20] Y. A. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. B. Orr, K.-R. Müller, Efficient
BackProp, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 9–48. doi:10.1007/
978-3-642-35289-8_3.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_3
[21] S. Hochreiter, Y. Bengio, P. Frasconi, J. Schmidhuber, et al., Gradient
flow in recurrent nets: the difficulty of learning long-term dependencies,
in: A Field Guide to Dynamical Recurrent Networks, A field guide to
dynamical recurrent neural networks. IEEE Press In.
[22] C. Dugas, Y. Bengio, F. Bélisle, C. Nadeau, R. Garcia, Incorporating
Second-Order Functional Knowledge for Better Option Pricing, in:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 13, MIT
Press.
URL
https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2000/hash/
44968aece94f667e4095002d140b5896-Abstract.html
[23] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, Y. Bengio, Deep Sparse Rectifier Neural Networks, in: Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, JMLR Workshop and Conference
Proceedings, pp. 315–323, iSSN: 1938-7228.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v15/glorot11a.html
[24] A. L. Maas, A. Y. Hannun, A. Y. Ng, et al., Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models, in: Proc. icml, Vol. 30, Atlanta,
GA, p. 3, issue: 1.

72

[25] D. Misra, Mish: A Self Regularized Non-Monotonic Activation Function, arXiv:1908.08681 [cs, stat]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1908.08681.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.08681
[26] D.-A. Clevert, T. Unterthiner, S. Hochreiter, Fast and Accurate Deep Network Learning by Exponential Linear Units (ELUs),
arXiv:1511.07289 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1511.07289.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07289
[27] Q. Wang, Y. Ma, K. Zhao, Y. Tian, A Comprehensive Survey of
Loss Functions in Machine Learning 9 (2) 187–212. doi:10.1007/
s40745-020-00253-5.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s40745-020-00253-5
[28] N. Qian, On the momentum term in gradient descent learning algorithms 12 (1) 145–151. doi:10.1016/S0893-6080(98)00116-6.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0893608098001166
[29] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, Y. Singer, Adaptive Subgradient Methods for Online Learning and Stochastic Optimization 12 (61) 2121–2159.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v12/duchi11a.html
[30] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,
arXiv:1412.6980 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
[31] L. Prechelt, Early Stopping — But When?, in: G. Montavon, G. B.
Orr, K.-R. Müller (Eds.), Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade: Second
Edition, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, pp. 53–67. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_5.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_5
[32] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, R. Salakhutdinov, Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting 15 (56) 1929–1958.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html
[33] S. Park, N. Kwak, Analysis on the Dropout Effect in Convolutional
Neural Networks, in: S.-H. Lai, V. Lepetit, K. Nishino, Y. Sato
73

(Eds.), Computer Vision – ACCV 2016, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer International Publishing, pp. 189–204. doi:10.1007/
978-3-319-54184-6_12.
[34] Z. Liu, Z. Xu, J. Jin, Z. Shen, T. Darrell, Dropout reduces underfitting, in: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vol. 202 of ICML’23, JMLR.org, pp. 22233–22248.
[35] R. Tibshirani, Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso 58 (1)
267–288, publisher: [Royal Statistical Society, Wiley].
URL https://www.jstor.org/stable/2346178
[36] H. Zou, T. Hastie, Regularization and Variable Selection Via the Elastic
Net 67 (2) 301–320. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x.
URL https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2005.00503.x
[37] K. Nakamura, B.-W. Hong, Adaptive Weight Decay for Deep Neural
Networks 7 118857–118865, conference Name: IEEE Access. doi:10.
1109/ACCESS.2019.2937139.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8811458
[38] S. Ioffe, C. Szegedy, Batch normalization: accelerating deep network
training by reducing internal covariate shift, in: Proceedings of the
32nd International Conference on International Conference on Machine
Learning - Volume 37, ICML’15, JMLR.org, pp. 448–456.
[39] J. Ba, J. Kiros, G. E. Hinton, Layer Normalization.
URL
https://www.semanticscholar.org/
paper/Layer-Normalization-Ba-Kiros/
97fb4e3d45bb098e27e0071448b6152217bd35a5
[40] G. Cybenko, Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function
2 (4) 303–314. doi:10.1007/BF02551274.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02551274
[41] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, H. White, Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators 2 (5) 359–366.
doi:10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0893608089900208
74

[42] B. Widrow, D. E. Rumelhart, M. A. Lehr, Neural networks: applications in industry, business and science 37 (3) 93–105. doi:
10.1145/175247.175257.
URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/175247.175257
[43] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long Short-Term Memory 9 (8) 1735–
1780. doi:10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735.
URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735
[44] K. Cho, B. van Merriënboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, Y. Bengio, Learning Phrase Representations using RNN
Encoder–Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation, in: A. Moschitti,
B. Pang, W. Daelemans (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1724–1734. doi:10.3115/
v1/D14-1179.
URL https://aclanthology.org/D14-1179
[45] X. Shi, Z. Chen, H. Wang, D.-Y. Yeung, W.-k. Wong, W.-c. Woo,
Convolutional LSTM Network: A Machine Learning Approach for
Precipitation Nowcasting, arXiv:1506.04214 [cs] version: 2. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1506.04214.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.04214
[46] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, ImageNet Classification
with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks, in: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, Vol. 25, Curran Associates, Inc.
URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2012/hash/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Abstract.html
[47] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very Deep Convolutional Networks for
Large-Scale Image Recognition, arXiv:1409.1556 [cs] version: 6. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1409.1556.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556
[48] M. D. Zeiler, R. Fergus, Visualizing and Understanding Convolutional
Networks, arXiv:1311.2901 [cs] version: 3. doi:10.48550/arXiv.
1311.2901.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2901

75

[49] M. Lin, Q. Chen, S. Yan, Network In Network, arXiv:1312.4400 [cs]
version: 3. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1312.4400.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.4400
[50] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, A. Rabinovich, Going Deeper with Convolutions,
arXiv:1409.4842 [cs] version: 1. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1409.4842.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.4842
[51] R. K. Srivastava, K. Greff, J. Schmidhuber, Highway Networks,
arXiv:1505.00387 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1505.00387.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.00387
[52] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, arXiv:1512.03385 [cs]. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1512.
03385.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385
[53] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, K. Q. Weinberger, Densely connected convolutional networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4700–4708.
[54] S. Zagoruyko,
N. Komodakis,
Wide Residual Networks,
arXiv:1605.07146 [cs] version: 4. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1605.07146.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.07146
[55] S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Dollár, Z. Tu, K. He, Aggregated Residual Transformations for Deep Neural Networks, arXiv:1611.05431 [cs].
doi:10.48550/arXiv.1611.05431.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.05431
[56] G. E. Hinton, A Practical Guide to Training Restricted Boltzmann Machines, in: G. Montavon, G. B. Orr, K.-R. Müller (Eds.), Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade: Second Edition, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer, pp. 599–619. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_
32.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_32
[57] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, Y.-W. Teh, A Fast Learning Algorithm for
Deep Belief Nets 18 (7) 1527–1554. doi:10.1162/neco.2006.18.7.
76

1527.
URL https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2006.18.7.1527
[58] G. E. Hinton, Deep belief networks 4 (5) 5947.
doi:
10.4249/scholarpedia.5947.
URL
http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Deep_belief_
networks
[59] J. Romero, J. P. Olson, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Quantum autoencoders for
efficient compression of quantum data 2 (4) 045001, publisher: IOP
Publishing. doi:10.1088/2058-9565/aa8072.
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2058-9565/aa8072
[60] X. Li, T. Zhang, X. Zhao, Z. Yi, Guided autoencoder for dimensionality
reduction of pedestrian features 50 (12) 4557–4567. doi:10.1007/
s10489-020-01813-1.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-01813-1
[61] M. H. Mohd Noor, Feature learning using convolutional denoising autoencoder for activity recognition 33 (17) 10909–10922. doi:10.1007/
s00521-020-05638-4.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-020-05638-4
[62] P. Li, Y. Pei, J. Li, A comprehensive survey on design
and application of autoencoder in deep learning 138 110176.
doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110176.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1568494623001941
[63] A. Ng, et al., Sparse autoencoder 72 (2011) 1–19.
[64] S. Rifai, G. Mesnil, P. Vincent, X. Muller, Y. Bengio, Y. Dauphin,
X. Glorot, Higher Order Contractive Auto-Encoder, in: D. Gunopulos,
T. Hofmann, D. Malerba, M. Vazirgiannis (Eds.), Machine Learning
and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer, pp. 645–660. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-23783-6_
41.
[65] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, P.-A. Manzagol, Extracting
and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders, in: Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning,
77

ICML ’08, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 1096–1103.
doi:10.1145/1390156.1390294.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1390156.1390294
[66] M. Chen, Z. Xu, K. Q. Weinberger, F. Sha, Marginalized denoising
autoencoders for domain adaptation, in: Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML’12, Omnipress, pp. 1627–1634.
[67] D. P. Kingma, M. Welling, Auto-encoding variational bayes.
[68] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, Generative adversarial nets 27.
[69] A. Odena, C. Olah, J. Shlens, Conditional image synthesis with auxiliary classifier gans, in: International conference on machine learning,
PMLR, pp. 2642–2651.
[70] X. Chen, Y. Duan, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, P. Abbeel,
InfoGAN: Interpretable Representation Learning by Information Maximizing Generative Adversarial Nets, arXiv:1606.03657 [cs, stat] version: 1. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1606.03657.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03657
[71] L. Weng, From GAN to WGAN, arXiv:1904.08994 [cs, stat]. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1904.08994.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.08994
[72] T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, J. Lehtinen, Progressive Growing of GANs
for Improved Quality, Stability, and Variation, arXiv:1710.10196 [cs,
stat] version: 3. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1710.10196.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10196
[73] T. Karras, S. Laine, T. Aila, A Style-Based Generator Architecture for
Generative Adversarial Networks, arXiv:1812.04948 [cs, stat] version:
3. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1812.04948.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.04948
[74] M. Tan, R. Pang, Q. V. Le, Efficientdet: Scalable and efficient object
detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
78

[75] D. W. Otter, J. R. Medina, J. K. Kalita, A survey of the usages of
deep learning for natural language processing 32 (2) 604–624. doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2979670.
[76] A. Esteva, A. Robicquet, B. Ramsundar, V. Kuleshov, M. DePristo,
K. Chou, C. Cui, G. Corrado, S. Thrun, J. Dean, A guide to deep
learning in healthcare 25 (1) 24–29.
[77] M. Soori, B. Arezoo, R. Dastres, Artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learning in advanced robotics, a review.
[78] A. Hernández-Blanco, B. Herrera-Flores, D. Tomás, B. NavarroColorado, et al., A systematic review of deep learning approaches to
educational data mining 2019.
[79] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P. Haffner, Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition 86 (11) 2278–2324, conference Name:
Proceedings of the IEEE. doi:10.1109/5.726791.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/726791
[80] P. Simard, D. Steinkraus, J. Platt, Best practices for convolutional
neural networks applied to visual document analysis, in: Seventh International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 2003.
Proceedings., pp. 958–963. doi:10.1109/ICDAR.2003.1227801.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1227801
[81] M. Matsugu, K. Mori, Y. Mitari, Y. Kaneda, Subject independent facial expression recognition with robust face detection using
a convolutional neural network 16 (5-6) 555–559. doi:10.1016/
S0893-6080(03)00115-1.
[82] G. Zhao, W. Yang, X. Ren, L. Li, Y. Wu, X. Sun, Well-classified examples are underestimated in classification with deep neural networks, in:
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 36,
pp. 9180–9189, issue: 8.
[83] Y. Huang, J. Qi, X. Wang, Z. Lin, Asymmetric Polynomial Loss for
Multi-Label Classification, in: ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
IEEE, pp. 1–5.
79

[84] W. Park, I. Park, S. Kim, J. Ryu, Robust Asymmetric Loss for
Multi-Label Long-Tailed Learning, pp. 2711–2720.
URL
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2023W/
CVAMD/html/Park_Robust_Asymmetric_Loss_for_Multi-Label_
Long-Tailed_Learning_ICCVW_2023_paper.html
[85] L. Nanni, A. Loreggia, L. Barcellona, S. Ghidoni, Building Ensemble of
Deep Networks: Convolutional Networks and Transformers 11 124962–
124974, conference Name: IEEE Access. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2023.
3330442.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10309107
[86] M. Wortsman, G. Ilharco, S. Y. Gadre, R. Roelofs, R. Gontijo-Lopes,
A. S. Morcos, H. Namkoong, A. Farhadi, Y. Carmon, S. Kornblith,
et al., Model soups: averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models
improves accuracy without increasing inference time, in: International
Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, pp. 23965–23998.
[87] C. Loh, S. Han, S. Sudalairaj, R. Dangovski, K. Xu, F. Wenzel, M. Soljacic, A. Srivastava, Multi-Symmetry Ensembles: Improving Diversity
and Generalization via Opposing Symmetries.
[88] T. Xiao, M. Singh, E. Mintun, T. Darrell, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, Early
convolutions help transformers see better 34 30392–30400.
[89] H. Wu, B. Xiao, N. Codella, M. Liu, X. Dai, L. Yuan, L. Zhang, CvT:
Introducing Convolutions to Vision Transformers, in: 2021 IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 22–31,
iSSN: 2380-7504. doi:10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00009.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9710031?denied=
[90] Z. Peng, Z. Guo, W. Huang, Y. Wang, L. Xie, J. Jiao, Q. Tian,
Q. Ye, Conformer: Local Features Coupling Global Representations
for Recognition and Detection 45 (8) 9454–9468, conference Name:
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.
doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3243048.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10040235
[91] Z. Tu, H. Talebi, H. Zhang, F. Yang, P. Milanfar, A. Bovik, Y. Li,
MaxViT: Multi-axis Vision Transformer, in: S. Avidan, G. Brostow,
80

M. Cissé, G. M. Farinella, T. Hassner (Eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV
2022, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Nature Switzerland,
pp. 459–479. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-20053-3_27.
[92] Y. Ma, R. Wang, M. Zong, W. Ji, Y. Wang, B. Ye, Convolutional
transformer network for fine-grained action recognition 569 127027.
doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2023.127027.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231223011505
[93] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, J. Malik, Rich Feature Hierarchies
for Accurate Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation, pp. 580–
587.
URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2014/html/
Girshick_Rich_Feature_Hierarchies_2014_CVPR_paper.html
[94] R. Girshick, Fast R-CNN, in: 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1440–1448, iSSN: 2380-7504. doi:
10.1109/ICCV.2015.169.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7410526
[95] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, J. Sun, Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time
Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks, in: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 28, Curran Associates,
Inc.
URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2015/hash/14bfa6bb14875e45bba028a21ed38046-Abstract.html
[96] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, A. Farhadi, You Only Look Once:
Unified, Real-Time Object Detection, pp. 779–788.
URL
https://www.cv-foundation.org/openaccess/content_
cvpr_2016/html/Redmon_You_Only_Look_CVPR_2016_paper.html
[97] J. Redmon, A. Farhadi, Yolov3: An incremental improvement.
[98] A. Bochkovskiy, C.-Y. Wang, H.-Y. M. Liao, Yolov4: Optimal speed
and accuracy of object detection.
[99] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C.-Y. Fu, A. C.
Berg, SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector, in: B. Leibe, J. Matas,
81

N. Sebe, M. Welling (Eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2016, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, pp. 21–
37. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_2.
[100] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, P. Dollár, Focal Loss for Dense
Object Detection 42 (2) 318–327, conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.
2018.2858826.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8417976
[101] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, S. Belongie,
Feature pyramid networks for object detection, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2117–
2125.
[102] M. Tan, R. Pang, Q. V. Le, Efficientdet: Scalable and efficient object
detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10781–10790.
[103] M. Tan, Q. Le, EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp. 6105–6114.
[104] N. Bodla, B. Singh, R. Chellappa, L. S. Davis, Soft-NMS–improving
object detection with one line of code, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, pp. 5561–5569.
[105] S. Liu, D. Huang, Y. Wang, Adaptive NMS: Refining pedestrian detection in a crowd, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6459–6468.
[106] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov,
S. Zagoruyko, End-to-End Object Detection with Transformers, in:
A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, J.-M. Frahm (Eds.), Computer Vision
– ECCV 2020, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing, pp. 213–229. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8\
_13.
[107] X. Zhu, W. Su, L. Lu, B. Li, X. Wang, J. Dai, Deformable DETR:
Deformable transformers for end-to-end object detection.
82

[108] X. Dai, Y. Chen, J. Yang, P. Zhang, L. Yuan, L. Zhang, Dynamic
DETR: End-to-End Object Detection With Dynamic Attention, pp.
2988–2997.
URL https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2021/html/
Dai_Dynamic_DETR_End-to-End_Object_Detection_With_Dynamic_
Attention_ICCV_2021_paper.html
[109] L. Huang, K. Lu, G. Song, L. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Li, TeachDETR: Better Training DETR With Teachers 45 (12) 15759–15771,
conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3319387.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10264211
[110] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, T. Darrell, Fully convolutional networks for
semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3431–3440.
[111] H. Noh, S. Hong, B. Han, Learning deconvolution network for semantic
segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, pp. 1520–1528.
[112] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, R. Cipolla, Segnet: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation 39 (12)
2481–2495, publisher: IEEE.
[113] A. Chaurasia, E. Culurciello, Linknet: Exploiting encoder representations for efficient semantic segmentation, in: 2017 IEEE visual communications and image processing (VCIP), IEEE, pp. 1–4.
[114] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, Mask R-CNN, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp.
2961–2969.
[115] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, J. Jia, Path aggregation network for instance segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8759–8768.
[116] L.-C. Chen, A. Hermans, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, P. Wang,
H. Adam, MaskLab: Instance segmentation by refining object detection with semantic and direction features, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4013–4022.
83

[117] Q. Liu, Y. Dong, X. Li, Multi-stage context refinement network for
semantic segmentation 535 53–63. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2023.03.
006.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231223002254
[118] Y. Liu, Y. Chen, P. Lasang, Q. Sun, Covariance Attention for Semantic
Segmentation 44 (4) 1805–1818, conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.
2020.3026069.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9206128
[119] R. Strudel, R. Garcia, I. Laptev, C. Schmid, Segmenter: Transformer
for semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 7262–7272.
[120] A. Hatamizadeh, H. Yin, G. Heinrich, J. Kautz, P. Molchanov, Global
context vision transformers, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR, pp. 12633–12646.
[121] H. Shi, M. Hayat, J. Cai, Transformer scale gate for semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3051–3060.
[122] A. Radford, L. Metz, S. Chintala, Unsupervised representation learning
with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks.
[123] H. Zhang, T. Xu, H. Li, S. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Huang, D. N. Metaxas,
StackGAN: Text to photo-realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pp. 5907–5915.
[124] H. Zhang, T. Xu, H. Li, S. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Huang, D. N. Metaxas,
StackGAN++: Realistic image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial networks 41 (8) 1947–1962, publisher: IEEE.
[125] Z. Zhang, Y. Xie, L. Yang, Photographic text-to-image synthesis with a
hierarchically-nested adversarial network, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6199–6208.

84

[126] M. Zhu, P. Pan, W. Chen, Y. Yang, DM-GAN: Dynamic memory generative adversarial networks for text-to-image synthesis, in: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5802–5810.
[127] T. Xu, P. Zhang, Q. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Gan, X. Huang, X. He,
AttnGAN: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1316–1324.
[128] J. Sun, Y. Zhou, B. Zhang, ResFPA-GAN: Text-to-image synthesis
with generative adversarial network based on residual block feature
pyramid attention, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO), IEEE, pp. 317–322.
[129] Y. Cai, X. Wang, Z. Yu, F. Li, P. Xu, Y. Li, L. Li, Dualattn-GAN:
Text to Image Synthesis With Dual Attentional Generative Adversarial
Network 7 183706–183716, conference Name: IEEE Access. doi:10.
1109/ACCESS.2019.2958864.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8930532?denied=
[130] M. Tao, H. Tang, F. Wu, X.-Y. Jing, B.-K. Bao, C. Xu, DF-GAN: A
simple and effective baseline for text-to-image synthesis, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 16515–16525.
[131] B. Yang, X. Xiang, W. Kong, J. Zhang, Y. Peng, DMF-GAN: Deep
Multimodal Fusion Generative Adversarial Networks for Text-to-Image
Synthesis 1–13Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia.
doi:10.1109/TMM.2024.3358086.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10413630
[132] B. Jiang, W. Zeng, C. Yang, R. Wang, B. Zhang, DE-GAN: Textto-image synthesis with dual and efficient fusion model 83 (8) 23839–
23852. doi:10.1007/s11042-023-16377-8.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-023-16377-8
[133] R. A. Calvo, H. A. Ceccatto, Intelligent document classification 4 (5)
411–420, publisher: IOS Press. doi:10.3233/IDA-2000-4503.

85

URL
https://content.iospress.com/articles/
intelligent-data-analysis/ida00028
[134] B. Yu, Z.-b. Xu, C.-h. Li, Latent semantic analysis for
text categorization using neural network 21 (8) 900–904.
doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2008.03.045.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0950705108000993
[135] G. Arevian, Recurrent Neural Networks for Robust Real-World Text
Classification, in: IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web
Intelligence (WI’07), pp. 326–329. doi:10.1109/WI.2007.126.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4427112
[136] J. Huang, Y. Feng, Optimization of Recurrent Neural Networks on
Natural Language Processing, in: Proceedings of the 2019 8th International Conference on Computing and Pattern Recognition, ICCPR ’19, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 39–45. doi:
10.1145/3373509.3373573.
URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3373509.3373573
[137] R. Wang, Z. Li, J. Cao, T. Chen, L. Wang, Convolutional Recurrent
Neural Networks for Text Classification, in: 2019 International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–6, iSSN: 2161-4407.
doi:10.1109/IJCNN.2019.8852406.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8852406
[138] G. Liu, J. Guo, Bidirectional LSTM with attention mechanism and convolutional layer for text classification 337 325–338.
doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2019.01.078.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231219301067
[139] Z. Lin, M. Feng, C. N. d. Santos, M. Yu, B. Xiang, B. Zhou, Y. Bengio,
A structured self-attentive sentence embedding.
[140] W. Li, F. Qi, M. Tang, Z. Yu, Bidirectional LSTM with self-attention
mechanism and multi-channel features for sentiment classification 387
63–77. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2020.01.006.

86

URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0925231220300254
[141] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
[142] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, R. Soricut,
ALBERT: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations.
[143] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis,
L. Zettlemoyer, V. Stoyanov, RoBERTa: A robustly optimized bert
pretraining approach.
[144] P. He, X. Liu, J. Gao, W. Chen, DeBERTa: Decoding-enhanced bert
with disentangled attention.
[145] B. Rodrawangpai, W. Daungjaiboon, Improving text classification with transformers and layer normalization 10 100403.
doi:10.1016/j.mlwa.2022.100403.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2666827022000792
[146] H. Murfi, Syamsyuriani, T. Gowandi, G. Ardaneswari, S. Nurrohmah, BERT-based combination of convolutional and recurrent
neural network for indonesian sentiment analysis 151 111112.
doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2023.111112.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1568494623011304
[147] S. Hao, P. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Sentiment recognition and analysis
method of official document text based on BERT–SVM model 35 (35)
24621–24632. doi:10.1007/s00521-023-08226-4.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-023-08226-4
[148] G. Wang, C. Li, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Shen, X. Zhang, R. Henao,
L. Carin, Joint embedding of words and labels for text classification.
[149] Y. Yan, F. Liu, X. Zhuang, J. Ju, An R-Transformer bilstm Model
Based on Attention for Multi-label Text Classification 55 (2) 1293–
1316. doi:10.1007/s11063-022-10938-y.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11063-022-10938-y
87

[150] X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, Y. Chen, A BERT-based multi-semantic
learning model with aspect-aware enhancement for aspect polarity classification 53 (4) 4609–4623. doi:10.1007/s10489-022-03702-1.
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03702-1
[151] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, Q. V. Le, Sequence to sequence learning with
neural networks 27.
[152] F. Stahlberg, Neural machine translation: A review 69 343–418.
[153] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, Y. Bengio, Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate.
[154] M.-T. Luong, H. Pham, C. D. Manning, Effective approaches to
attention-based neural machine translation.
[155] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey, et al., Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation.
[156] L. Lupo, M. Dinarelli, L. Besacier, Encoding Sentence Position in
Context-Aware Neural Machine Translation with Concatenation.
[157] E. Rippeth, M. Carpuat, K. Duh, M. Post, Improving Word Sense
Disambiguation in Neural Machine Translation with Salient Document
Context.
[158] X. Wu, Y. Xia, J. Zhu, L. Wu, S. Xie, T. Qin, A study of BERT for
context-aware neural machine translation 111 (3) 917–935, publisher:
Springer.
[159] D. Kim, Y. Baek, S. Yang, J. Choo, Towards Formality-Aware Neural
Machine Translation by Leveraging Context Information, in: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pp.
7384–7392.
[160] A. M. Gezmu, A. Nürnberger, Transformers for Low-resource Neural
Machine Translation., in: ICAART (1), pp. 459–466.

88

[161] A. Araabi, C. Monz, Optimizing Transformer for Low-Resource Neural
Machine Translation, in: D. Scott, N. Bel, C. Zong (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
International Committee on Computational Linguistics, pp. 3429–3435.
doi:10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.304.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.coling-main.304
[162] B. Li, Y. Weng, F. Xia, H. Deng, Towards better Chinese-centric neural
machine translation for low-resource languages 84 101566, publisher:
Elsevier.
[163] L. S. Meetei, A. Singh, T. D. Singh, S. Bandyopadhyay, Do cues in
a video help in handling rare words in a machine translation system
under a low-resource setting? 3 100016, publisher: Elsevier.
[164] Y.-p. Nie, Y. Han, J.-m. Huang, B. Jiao, A.-p. Li, Attention-based
encoder-decoder model for answer selection in question answering
18 (4) 535–544, publisher: Springer.
[165] J. Yin, X. Jiang, Z. Lu, L. Shang, H. Li, X. Li, Neural generative
question answering.
[166] J. Li, W. Monroe, A. Ritter, M. Galley, J. Gao, D. Jurafsky, Deep
reinforcement learning for dialogue generation.
[167] J. Wu, T. Mu, J. Thiyagalingam, J. Y. Goulermas, Building interactive
sentence-aware representation based on generative language model for
community question answering 389 93–107, publisher: Elsevier.
[168] Z. Li, C. Niu, F. Meng, Y. Feng, Q. Li, J. Zhou, Incremental transformer with deliberation decoder for document grounded conversations.
[169] S. Alrowili, K. Vijay-Shanker, BioM-transformers: building large
biomedical language models with BERT, ALBERT and ELECTRA,
in: Proceedings of the 20th workshop on biomedical language processing, pp. 221–227.
[170] S. Alrowili, K. Vijay-Shanker, Exploring Biomedical Question Answering with BioM-Transformers At BioASQ10B challenge: Findings and
Techniques., in: CLEF (Working Notes), pp. 222–234.

89

[171] T. Ma, Q. Pan, H. Rong, Y. Qian, Y. Tian, N. Al-Nabhan, TBERTSum: Topic-aware text summarization based on bert 9 (3) 879–
890, publisher: IEEE.
[172] Q. Xie, J. A. Bishop, P. Tiwari, S. Ananiadou, Pre-trained language
models with domain knowledge for biomedical extractive summarization 252 109460, publisher: Elsevier.
[173] M. Weiser, The computer for the 21 st century 265 (3) 94–105.
[174] Y. He, S. Nazir, B. Nie, S. Khan, J. Zhang, Developing an efficient
deep learning-based trusted model for pervasive computing using an
lstm-based classification model 2020 1–6.
[175] A. O. Ige, M. H. M. Noor, A survey on unsupervised learning for wearable sensor-based activity recognition 109363.
[176] R. Singh, S. Srivastava, Stock prediction using deep learning 76 18569–
18584.
[177] X. Zhang, Y. Han, W. Xu, Q. Wang, Hoba: A novel feature engineering methodology for credit card fraud detection with a deep learning
architecture 557 302–316.
[178] Y. Lei, Q. Peng, Y. Shen, Deep learning for algorithmic trading: enhancing macd strategy, in: Proceedings of the 2020 6th International
Conference on Computing and Artificial Intelligence, pp. 51–57.
[179] H.-B. Zhang, Y.-X. Zhang, B. Zhong, Q. Lei, L. Yang, J.-X. Du, D.-S.
Chen, A comprehensive survey of vision-based human action recognition methods 19 (5) 1005.
[180] L. M. Dang, K. Min, H. Wang, M. J. Piran, C. H. Lee, H. Moon, Sensorbased and vision-based human activity recognition: A comprehensive
survey 108 107561.
[181] W. Gao, L. Zhang, Q. Teng, J. He, H. Wu, Danhar: Dual attention network for multimodal human activity recognition using wearable sensors
111 107728.
[182] S. Gupta, Deep learning based human activity recognition (har) using
wearable sensor data 1 (2) 100046.
90

[183] C. B. Erdas, S. Guney, Human activity recognition by using different
deep learning approaches for wearable sensors 53 1795–1809.
[184] M. G. Ragab, S. J. Abdulkadir, N. Aziz, Random search one dimensional cnn for human activity recognition, in: 2020 International Conference on Computational Intelligence (ICCI), IEEE, pp. 86–91.
[185] K. Banjarey, S. P. Sahu, D. K. Dewangan, Human activity recognition
using 1d convolutional neural network, in: Sentimental Analysis and
Deep Learning: Proceedings of ICSADL 2021, Springer, pp. 691–702.
[186] M. M. H. Shuvo, N. Ahmed, K. Nouduri, K. Palaniappan, A hybrid
approach for human activity recognition with support vector machine
and 1d convolutional neural network, in: 2020 IEEE Applied Imagery
Pattern Recognition Workshop (AIPR), IEEE, pp. 1–5.
[187] C. Han, L. Zhang, Y. Tang, W. Huang, F. Min, J. He, Human activity recognition using wearable sensors by heterogeneous convolutional
neural networks 198 116764.
[188] A. O. Ige, M. H. M. Noor, Wsense: A robust feature learning module
for lightweight human activity recognition.
[189] S. Deep, X. Zheng, Hybrid model featuring cnn and lstm architecture
for human activity recognition on smartphone sensor data, in: 2019
20th international conference on parallel and distributed computing,
applications and technologies (PDCAT), IEEE, pp. 259–264.
[190] Y. J. Luwe, C. P. Lee, K. M. Lim, Wearable sensor-based human activity recognition with hybrid deep learning model, in: Informatics,
Vol. 9, MDPI, p. 56.
[191] L.-F. Shi, Z.-Y. Liu, K.-J. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Jing, Novel deep learning
network for gait recognition using multimodal inertial sensors 23 (2)
849.
[192] N. Dua, S. N. Singh, V. B. Semwal, S. K. Challa, Inception inspired
cnn-gru hybrid network for human activity recognition 82 (4) 5369–
5403.

91

[193] H. A. Imran, Q. Riaz, M. Hussain, H. Tahir, R. Arshad, Smart-wearable
sensors and cnn-bigru model: A powerful combination for human activity recognition.
[194] D. Chen, S. Yongchareon, E. M.-K. Lai, J. Yu, Q. Z. Sheng, Y. Li,
Transformer with bidirectional gru for nonintrusive, sensor-based activity recognition in a multiresident environment 9 (23) 23716–23727.
[195] O. Nafea, W. Abdul, G. Muhammad, M. Alsulaiman, Sensor-based
human activity recognition with spatio-temporal deep learning 21 (6)
2141.
[196] Z. N. Khan, J. Ahmad, Attention induced multi-head convolutional
neural network for human activity recognition 110 107671.
[197] A. O. Ige, M. H. Mohd Noor, A deep local-temporal architecture
with attention for lightweight human activity recognition 149 110954.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110954.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1568494623009729
[198] A. B. Nassif, I. Shahin, I. Attili, M. Azzeh, K. Shaalan, Speech recognition using deep neural networks: A systematic review 7 19143–19165.
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2896880.
[199] S. S. Tirumala, S. R. Shahamiri, A review on deep learning approaches
in speaker identification, in: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Signal Processing Systems, Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 142–147. doi:10.1145/3015166.3015210.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3015166.3015210
[200] F. Ye, J. Yang, A deep neural network model for speaker identification
11 (8). doi:10.3390/app11083603.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/8/3603
[201] R. A. Khalil, E. Jones, M. I. Babar, T. Jan, M. H. Zafar, T. Alhussain,
Speech emotion recognition using deep learning techniques: A review
7 117327–117345. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2936124.
[202] G. Singh, S. Sharma, V. Kumar, M. Kaur, M. Baz, M. Masud, et al.,
Spoken language identification using deep learning 2021.
92

[203] Y. Jiao, M. Tu, V. Berisha, J. M. Liss, Accent identification by combining deep neural networks and recurrent neural networks trained on
long and short term features., in: Interspeech, pp. 2388–2392.
[204] H. A. Sánchez-Hevia, R. Gil-Pita, M. Utrilla-Manso, M. Rosa-Zurera,
Age group classification and gender recognition from speech with temporal convolutional neural networks 81 (3) 3535–3552.
[205] A. A. Alnuaim, M. Zakariah, C. Shashidhar, W. A. Hatamleh,
H. Tarazi, P. K. Shukla, R. Ratna, Speaker gender recognition based
on deep neural networks and resnet50 2022 1–13.
[206] R. Srivastava, D. Pandey, Speech recognition using hmm and soft
computing 51 1878–1883. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.
2021.10.097.
[207] J. Padmanabhan, M. J. J. Premkumar, Machine learning in automatic
speech recognition: A survey 32 (4) 240–251. doi:10.1080/02564602.
2015.1010611.
[208] A. Mukhamadiyev, I. Khujayarov, O. Djuraev, J. Cho, Automatic
speech recognition method based on deep learning approaches for uzbek
language 22 (10) 3683. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/s22103683.
[209] X. Lu, S. Li, M. Fujimoto, Automatic speech recognition 21–38.
[210] C. Hema, F. P. Garcia Marquez, Emotional speech recognition using cnn and deep learning techniques 211 109492.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2023.109492.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0003682X23002906
[211] A. Shewalkar, D. Nyavanandi, S. A. Ludwig, Performance evaluation
of deep neural networks applied to speech recognition: Rnn, lstm and
gru 9 (4) 235–245.
[212] R. Prabhavalkar, K. Rao, T. N. Sainath, B. Li, L. Johnson, N. Jaitly,
A comparison of sequence-to-sequence models for speech recognition.,
in: Interspeech, pp. 939–943.
[213] A. Graves, Sequence transduction with recurrent neural networks.
93

[214] W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. V. Le, O. Vinyals, Listen, attend and spell.
[215] N. Jaitly, Q. V. Le, O. Vinyals, I. Sutskever, D. Sussillo, S. Bengio, An
online sequence-to-sequence model using partial conditioning 29.
[216] C. Raffel, M.-T. Luong, P. J. Liu, R. J. Weiss, D. Eck, Online and
linear-time attention by enforcing monotonic alignments, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp. 2837–2846.
[217] H. Sak, M. Shannon, K. Rao, F. Beaufays, Recurrent neural aligner:
An encoder-decoder neural network model for sequence to sequence
mapping., in: Interspeech, Vol. 8, pp. 1298–1302.
[218] G. Szűcs, D. Huszti, Seq2seq deep learning method for summary generation by lstm with two-way encoder and beam search decoder, in: 2019
IEEE 17th International Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY), pp. 221–226. doi:10.1109/SISY47553.2019.9111502.
[219] Z. Li, J. Cai, S. He, H. Zhao, Seq2seq dependency parsing, in: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 3203–3214.
[220] C.-C. Chiu, T. N. Sainath, Y. Wu, R. Prabhavalkar, P. Nguyen,
Z. Chen, A. Kannan, R. J. Weiss, K. Rao, E. Gonina, N. Jaitly, B. Li,
J. Chorowski, M. Bacchiani, State-of-the-art speech recognition with
sequence-to-sequence models, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4774–4778.
doi:10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8462105.
[221] A. M. Ozbayoglu, M. U. Gudelek, O. B. Sezer, Deep learning for financial applications: A survey 93 106384.
[222] F. Shen, X. Zhao, G. Kou, F. E. Alsaadi, A new deep learning ensemble credit risk evaluation model with an improved synthetic minority
oversampling technique 98 106852.
[223] W. Wang, W. Li, N. Zhang, K. Liu, Portfolio formation with preselection using deep learning from long-term financial data 143 113042.
[224] L. Chen, M. Pelger, J. Zhu, Deep learning in asset pricing 70 (2) 714–
750.
94

[225] M. Ahnouch, L. Elaachak, A. Ghadi, Model risk in financial derivatives
and the transformative impact of deep learning: A systematic review,
in: The Proceedings of the International Conference on Smart City
Applications, Springer, pp. 155–165.
[226] S. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Wei, A new ensemble deep learning approach for exchange rates forecasting and trading 46 101160.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2020.101160.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1474034620301312
[227] M. Z. Abedin, M. H. Moon, M. K. Hassan, P. Hajek, Deep learningbased exchange rate prediction during the covid-19 pandemic 1–52.
[228] G. Wang, J. Ma, Y. Wang, T. Tao, G. Ren, H. Zhu, Sudf-rs: A new
foreign exchange rate prediction method considering the complementarity of supervised and unsupervised deep representation features 214
119152. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.119152.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0957417422021704
[229] M. Nikou, G. Mansourfar, J. Bagherzadeh, Stock price prediction using deep learning algorithm and its comparison with machine learning
algorithms 26 (4) 164–174.
[230] S. Cai, X. Feng, Z. Deng, Z. Ming, Z. Shan, Financial news quantization and stock market forecast research based on cnn and lstm, in:
Smart Computing and Communication: Third International Conference, SmartCom 2018, Tokyo, Japan, December 10–12, 2018, Proceedings 3, Springer, pp. 366–375.
[231] M. U. Gudelek, S. A. Boluk, A. M. Ozbayoglu, A deep learning based
stock trading model with 2-d cnn trend detection, in: 2017 IEEE symposium series on computational intelligence (SSCI), IEEE, pp. 1–8.
[232] J. Eapen, D. Bein, A. Verma, Novel deep learning model with cnn
and bi-directional lstm for improved stock market index prediction, in:
2019 IEEE 9th annual computing and communication workshop and
conference (CCWC), IEEE, pp. 0264–0270.

95

[233] X. Liu, H. Wang, Z. Li, L. Qin, Deep learning in ecg diagnosis: A
review 227 107187. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.
107187.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0950705121004494
[234] C. W. Tsao, A. W. Aday, Z. I. Almarzooq, C. A. Anderson, P. Arora,
C. L. Avery, C. M. Baker-Smith, A. Z. Beaton, A. K. Boehme, A. E.
Buxton, et al., Heart disease and stroke statistics—2023 update: a
report from the american heart association 147 (8) e93–e621.
[235] M. Llamedo, J. P. Martı́nez, Heartbeat classification using feature
selection driven by database generalization criteria 58 (3) 616–625.
doi:10.1109/TBME.2010.2068048.
[236] S. M. Mathews, C. Kambhamettu, K. E. Barner, A novel application of deep learning for single-lead ecg classification 99 53–62.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2018.05.013.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0010482518301264
[237] w. zhu wenliang wenliang, X. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Wang, Arrhythmia
recognition and classification using ecg morphology and segment feature analysis 16 (1) 131–138. doi:10.1109/TCBB.2018.2846611.
[238] M. P. Desai, G. Caffarena, R. Jevtic, D. G. Márquez, A. Otero, A lowlatency, low-power fpga implementation of ecg signal characterization
using hermite polynomials 10 (19) 2324.
[239] P. Crippa, A. Curzi, L. Falaschetti, C. Turchetti, et al., Multi-class ecg
beat classification based on a gaussian mixture model of karhunen-loève
transform 16 (1) 2–1.
[240] U. R. Acharya, S. L. Oh, Y. Hagiwara, J. H. Tan, M. Adam, A. Gertych,
R. San Tan, A deep convolutional neural network model to classify
heartbeats 89 389–396.
[241] U. B. Baloglu, M. Talo, O. Yildirim, R. San Tan, U. R. Acharya,
Classification of myocardial infarction with multi-lead ecg signals and
deep cnn 122 23–30.
96

[242] S. Singh, S. K. Pandey, U. Pawar, R. R. Janghel, Classification of ecg
arrhythmia using recurrent neural networks 132 1290–1297.
[243] E. Prabhakararao, S. Dandapat, Attentive rnn-based network to fuse
12-lead ecg and clinical features for improved myocardial infarction
diagnosis 27 2029–2033.
[244] M. Wang, S. Rahardja, P. Fränti, S. Rahardja, Single-lead ecg recordings modeling for end-to-end recognition of atrial fibrillation with dualpath rnn 79 104067.
[245] S. Sowmya, D. Jose, Contemplate on ecg signals and classification of
arrhythmia signals using cnn-lstm deep learning model 24 100558.
[246] H. M. Rai, K. Chatterjee, Hybrid cnn-lstm deep learning model and
ensemble technique for automatic detection of myocardial infarction
using big ecg data 52 (5) 5366–5384.
[247] R. Banerjee, A. Ghose, K. Muthana Mandana, A hybrid cnn-lstm architecture for detection of coronary artery disease from ecg, in: 2020
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8.
doi:10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9207044.
[248] S. Kusuma, K. Jothi, Ecg signals-based automated diagnosis of congestive heart failure using deep cnn and lstm architecture 42 (1) 247–257.
[249] C.-Y. Chen, Y.-T. Lin, S.-J. Lee, W.-C. Tsai, T.-C. Huang, Y.-H.
Liu, M.-C. Cheng, C.-Y. Dai, Automated ecg classification based on
1d deep learning network 202 127–135, machine Learning Methods
for Bio-Medical Image and Signal Processing: Recent Advances.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2021.04.021.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1046202321001134
[250] J. Wang, X. Qiao, C. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Yao, H. Zhang, Automated ecg classification using a non-local convolutional block attention
module 203 106006.
[251] J. Zhang, A. Liu, M. Gao, X. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Chen, Ecg-based
multi-class arrhythmia detection using spatio-temporal attention-based
convolutional recurrent neural network 106 101856.
97

[252] F. Zhu, F. Ye, Y. Fu, Q. Liu, B. Shen, Electrocardiogram generation
with a bidirectional lstm-cnn generative adversarial network 9 (1) 6734.
[253] R. T. Schirrmeister, J. T. Springenberg, L. D. J. Fiederer,
M. Glasstetter, K. Eggensperger, M. Tangermann, F. Hutter,
W. Burgard, T. Ball, Deep learning with convolutional neural
networks for eeg decoding and visualization 38 (11) 5391–5420.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23730.
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/hbm.
23730
[254] Z. Gao, W. Dang, X. Wang, X. Hong, L. Hou, K. Ma, M. Perc, Complex
networks and deep learning for eeg signal analysis 15 (3) 369–388.
[255] K. K. Ang, C. Guan, Eeg-based strategies to detect motor imagery for
control and rehabilitation 25 (4) 392–401. doi:10.1109/TNSRE.2016.
2646763.
[256] Z. Shen, G. Li, J. Fang, H. Zhong, J. Wang, Y. Sun, X. Shen, Aberrated multidimensional eeg characteristics in patients with generalized
anxiety disorder: A machine-learning based analysis framework 22 (14)
5420.
[257] P. Boonyakitanont, A. Lek-Uthai, K. Chomtho, J. Songsiri, A review
of feature extraction and performance evaluation in epileptic seizure
detection using eeg 57 101702.
[258] M. Sharma, J. Tiwari, V. Patel, U. R. Acharya, Automated identification of sleep disorder types using triplet half-band filter and ensemble
machine learning techniques with eeg signals 10 (13) 1531.
[259] F. Vaquerizo-Villar, G. C. Gutiérrez-Tobal, E. Calvo, D. Álvarez,
L. Kheirandish-Gozal, F. Del Campo, D. Gozal, R. Hornero, An explainable deep-learning model to stage sleep states in children and propose novel eeg-related patterns in sleep apnea 165 107419.
[260] A. Modir, S. Shamekhi, P. Ghaderyan, A systematic review and
methodological analysis of eeg-based biomarkers of alzheimer’s disease
113274.

98

[261] H. Altaheri, G. Muhammad, M. Alsulaiman, S. U. Amin, G. A. Altuwaijri, W. Abdul, M. A. Bencherif, M. Faisal, Deep learning techniques for classification of electroencephalogram (eeg) motor imagery
(mi) signals: A review 35 (20) 14681–14722.
[262] C. Brunner, M. Naeem, R. Leeb, B. Graimann, G. Pfurtscheller, Spatial
filtering and selection of optimized components in four class motor
imagery eeg data using independent components analysis 28 (8) 957–
964.
[263] A. Delorme, T. Sejnowski, S. Makeig, Enhanced detection of artifacts
in eeg data using higher-order statistics and independent component
analysis 34 (4) 1443–1449.
[264] A. Jafarifarmand, M. A. Badamchizadeh, Eeg artifacts handling in a
real practical brain–computer interface controlled vehicle 27 (6) 1200–
1208.
[265] R. Zhang, Q. Zong, L. Dou, X. Zhao, A novel hybrid deep learning
scheme for four-class motor imagery classification 16 (6) 066004.
[266] S. Kumar, A. Sharma, K. Mamun, T. Tsunoda, A deep learning approach for motor imagery eeg signal classification, in: 2016 3rd AsiaPacific World Congress on Computer Science and Engineering (APWC
on CSE), IEEE, pp. 34–39.
[267] N. Tibrewal, N. Leeuwis, M. Alimardani, Classification of motor imagery eeg using deep learning increases performance in inefficient bci
users 17 (7) e0268880.
[268] M. Dai, D. Zheng, R. Na, S. Wang, S. Zhang, Eeg classification of
motor imagery using a novel deep learning framework 19 (3) 551.
[269] M. Li, W. Zhu, M. Zhang, Y. Sun, Z. Wang, The novel recognition
method with optimal wavelet packet and lstm based recurrent neural network, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), pp. 584–589. doi:10.1109/ICMA.2017.
8015882.

99

[270] F. Li, F. He, F. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Xia, X. Li, A novel simplified
convolutional neural network classification algorithm of motor imagery
eeg signals based on deep learning 10 (5) 1605.
[271] J. Hwang, S. Park, J. Chi, Improving multi-class motor imagery eeg
classification using overlapping sliding window and deep learning model
12 (5). doi:10.3390/electronics12051186.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/12/5/1186
[272] Y. Zhao, L. He, Deep learning in the eeg diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease, in: Computer Vision-ACCV 2014 Workshops: Singapore, Singapore, November 1-2, 2014, Revised Selected Papers, Part I 12, Springer,
pp. 340–353.
[273] W. Xia, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Usman, A novel method for diagnosing
alzheimer’s disease using deep pyramid cnn based on eeg signals 9 (4).
[274] A. T. Hermawan, I. A. E. Zaeni, A. P. Wibawa, G. Gunawan, W. H.
Hendrawan, Y. Kristian, A multi representation deep learning approach
for epileptic seizure detection 5 (1) 187–204.
[275] A. H. Abdulwahhab, A. H. Abdulaal, A. H. Thary Al-Ghrairi,
A. A. Mohammed, M. Valizadeh, Detection of epileptic seizure using
eeg signals analysis based on deep learning techniques 181 114700.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2024.114700.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0960077924002522
[276] P. Pandey, K. Seeja, Subject independent emotion recognition from eeg using vmd and deep learning 34 (5) 1730–1738.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2019.11.003.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1319157819309991
[277] A. Hassouneh, A. Mutawa, M. Murugappan, Development of a realtime emotion recognition system using facial expressions and eeg based
on machine learning and deep neural network methods 20 100372.
[278] J. Pan, W. Fang, Z. Zhang, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Multimodal
emotion recognition based on facial expressions, speech, and eeg 1–
8doi:10.1109/OJEMB.2023.3240280.
100

[279] S. Wang, J. Qu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Multimodal emotion recognition
from eeg signals and facial expressions 11 33061–33068.
[280] A. R. Munappy, J. Bosch, H. H. Olsson, A. Arpteg, B. Brinne, Data
management for production quality deep learning models: Challenges
and solutions 191 111359. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2022.111359.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0164121222000905
[281] A. R. Luca, T. F. Ursuleanu, L. Gheorghe, R. Grigorovici, S. Iancu,
M. Hlusneac, A. Grigorovici, Impact of quality, type and volume of
data used by deep learning models in the analysis of medical images
29 100911. doi:10.1016/j.imu.2022.100911.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2352914822000612
[282] F. Zhuang, Z. Qi, K. Duan, D. Xi, Y. Zhu, H. Zhu, H. Xiong, Q. He,
A comprehensive survey on transfer learning 109 (1) 43–76, publisher:
IEEE.
[283] A. Mumuni, F. Mumuni, Data augmentation:
A comprehensive survey of modern approaches 16 100258.
doi:
10.1016/j.array.2022.100258.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2590005622000911
[284] C. Hu, Z. Sun, C. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Xing, Survey of Time Series Data
Generation in IoT 23 (15) 6976, number: 15 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. doi:10.3390/s23156976.
URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/15/6976
[285] H. Murtaza, M. Ahmed, N. F. Khan, G. Murtaza, S. Zafar, A. Bano,
Synthetic data generation: State of the art in health care domain 48
100546. doi:10.1016/j.cosrev.2023.100546.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1574013723000138
[286] S. Tonekaboni, S. Joshi, M. D. McCradden, A. Goldenberg, What clinicians want: contextualizing explainable machine learning for clinical

101

end use, in: Machine learning for healthcare conference, PMLR, pp.
359–380.
[287] E. Tjoa, H. J. Khok, T. Chouhan, C. Guan, Enhancing the confidence
of deep learning classifiers via interpretable saliency maps 562 126825,
publisher: Elsevier.
[288] X. Li, Q. Shen, A hybrid framework based on knowledge distillation
for explainable disease diagnosis 238 121844, publisher: Elsevier.
[289] C. Termritthikun, A. Umer, S. Suwanwimolkul, F. Xia, I. Lee, Explainable knowledge distillation for on-device chest x-ray classificationPublisher: IEEE.
[290] W. Xiong, Z. Xiong, Y. Cui, An Explainable Attention Network for
Fine-Grained Ship Classification Using Remote-Sensing Images 60 1–
14, conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing. doi:10.1109/TGRS.2022.3162195.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9741720
[291] L. Fernandes, J. N. Fernandes, M. Calado, J. R. Pinto, R. Cerqueira,
J. S. Cardoso, Intrinsic Explainability for End-to-End Object DetectionPublisher: IEEE.
[292] M. N. Freire, L. N. de Castro, e-Recruitment recommender systems: a
systematic review 63 1–20, publisher: Springer.
[293] R. K. Dass, N. Petersen, M. Omori, T. R. Lave, U. Visser, Detecting
racial inequalities in criminal justice: towards an equitable deep learning approach for generating and interpreting racial categories using
mugshots 38 (2) 897–918, publisher: Springer.
[294] A. Gicić, D. Donko, A. Subasi, Intelligent credit scoring using deep
learning methods 35 (9) e7637.
[295] N. Schaaf, O. de Mitri, H. B. Kim, A. Windberger, M. F. Huber, Towards measuring bias in image classification, in: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning–ICANN 2021: 30th International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Bratislava, Slovakia, September
14–17, 2021, Proceedings, Part III 30, Springer, pp. 433–445.

102

[296] A. Giloni, E. Grolman, T. Hagemann, R. Fromm, S. Fischer, Y. Elovici,
A. Shabtai, BENN: Bias Estimation Using a Deep Neural NetworkPublisher: IEEE.
[297] V. Iosifidis, T. N. H. Tran, E. Ntoutsi, Fairness-enhancing interventions in stream classification, in: Database and Expert Systems Applications: 30th International Conference, DEXA 2019, Linz, Austria,
August 26–29, 2019, Proceedings, Part I 30, Springer, pp. 261–276.
[298] T. Kehrenberg, Z. Chen, N. Quadrianto, Tuning fairness by balancing
target labels 3 33, publisher: Frontiers Media SA.
[299] B. Jain, M. Huber, R. Elmasri, Increasing Fairness in Predictions Using
Bias Parity Score Based Loss Function Regularization 36. doi:10.
32473/flairs.36.133311.
URL https://journals.flvc.org/FLAIRS/article/view/133311
[300] J. Yang, A. A. Soltan, D. W. Eyre, D. A. Clifton, Algorithmic fairness
and bias mitigation for clinical machine learning with deep reinforcement learning 5 (8) 884–894, publisher: Nature Publishing Group UK
London.
[301] L. Li, J. Zhu, M.-T. Sun, Deep learning based method for pruning deep neural networks, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW), pp. 312–317. doi:
10.1109/ICMEW.2019.00-68.
[302] J. Yang, X. Shen, J. Xing, X. Tian, H. Li, B. Deng, J. Huang, X.-s. Hua,
Quantization networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
[303] S. Stanton, P. Izmailov, P. Kirichenko, A. A. Alemi, A. G. Wilson,
Does knowledge distillation really work?, in: M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, J. W. Vaughan (Eds.), Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 34, Curran Associates,
Inc., pp. 6906–6919.
URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2021/file/376c6b9ff3bedbbea56751a84fffc10c-Paper.pdf

103

[304] N. Akhtar, A. Mian, Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning
in computer vision: A survey 6 14410–14430. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.
2018.2807385.
[305] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, R. Fergus, Intriguing properties of neural networks.
[306] P. Tabacof, J. Tavares, E. Valle, Adversarial images for variational
autoencoders.
[307] W. E. Zhang, Q. Z. Sheng, A. Alhazmi, C. Li, Adversarial attacks on
deep-learning models in natural language processing: A survey 11 (3)
1–41.
[308] L. Jiang, X. Ma, S. Chen, J. Bailey, Y.-G. Jiang, Black-box adversarial
attacks on video recognition models, in: Proceedings of the 27th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, pp. 864–872.
[309] M. Esmaeilpour, P. Cardinal, A. L. Koerich, A robust approach for
securing audio classification against adversarial attacks 15 2147–2159.
[310] S. Maldonado, C. Vairetti, K. Jara, M. Carrasco, J. López, Owadapt:
An adaptive loss function for deep learning using owa operators 280
111022.
[311] W. Zhu, O. Wu, N. Yang, Irda: Implicit data augmentation for deep
imbalanced regression 120873.
[312] S. B. Belhaouari, A. Islam, K. Kassoul, A. Al-Fuqaha, A. Bouzerdoum,
Oversampling techniques for imbalanced data in regression 252 124118.
[313] X. Wang, Y. Zhang, N. Bai, Q. Yu, Q. Wang, Class-imbalanced time series anomaly detection method based on cost-sensitive hybrid network
238 122192.
[314] J. Ircio, A. Lojo, U. Mori, S. Malinowski, J. A. Lozano, Minimum recall-based loss function for imbalanced time series classification
35 (10) 10024–10034.
[315] L. Moles, A. Andres, G. Echegaray, F. Boto, Exploring data augmentation and active learning benefits in imbalanced datasets 12 (12) 1898.
104

[316] Y. Zhu, S. Wang, H. Yu, W. Li, J. Tian, Sfpl: Sample-specific finegrained prototype learning for imbalanced medical image classification
97 103281.

105

