Article

ALF-MoE: An Attention-Based Learnable Fusion of Specialized
Expert Networks for Accurate Traffic Classification
Jisi Chandroth 1, * , Gabriel Stoian 2 and Daniela Danciulescu 2, *
1
2

*

Department of AI and Software, Gachon University, Seongnam 13120, Republic of Korea
Department of Computer Science, University of Craiova, 200585 Craiova, Romania; gabriel.stoian@edu.ucv.ro
Correspondence: jisichandroth@gachon.ac.kr (J.C.); daniela.danciulescu@edu.ucv.ro (D.D.)

Abstract
Traffic classification remains a critical challenge in the Internet of Things (IoT), particularly
for enhancing security and ensuring Quality of Service (QoS). Although deep learning
methods have shown strong performance in traffic classification, learning diverse and complementary representations across heterogeneous network traffic patterns remains difficult.
To address this issue, this study proposes a novel Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture for
multiclass traffic classification in IoT environments. The proposed model integrates five
specialized expert networks, each targeting a distinct feature category in network traffic.
Specifically, it employs a Dense Neural Network for general features, a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) for spatial patterns, a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)-based model
for statistical variations, a Convolutional Autoencoder (CAE) for frequency-domain representations, and a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) for temporal dependencies. A dynamic
gating mechanism, coupled with an Attention-based Learnable Fusion (ALF) module,
adaptively aggregates the experts’ outputs to produce the final classification decision. The
proposed ALF-MoE model was evaluated on three public benchmark datasets, such as ISCX
VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic, achieving accuracies of 98.43%, 98.96%, and
97.93%, respectively. These results confirm its effectiveness and reliability across diverse
scenarios. It also outperforms baseline methods in terms of its accuracy and the F1-score.
Keywords: Internet of Things; traffic classification; Mixture of Experts; ensemble learning;
deep learning
MSC: 68P25

1. Introduction

Received: 10 December 2025
Revised: 29 January 2026
Accepted: 29 January 2026
Published: 1 February 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

The Internet of Things (IoT) is rapidly expanding toward tens of billions of interconnected devices, which is expected to increase the diversity of communication protocols,
application services, and overall traffic volumes in operational networks. Recent industry forecasts estimate approximately 38–39 billion IoT connections by 2030, with robust
growth in industrial and smart city deployments [1,2]. This scale and heterogeneity further
complicate traffic management, as IoT networks host a mix of benign application flows
and malicious activities (scanning and botnet traffic) that can directly undermine security
monitoring and degrade the Quality of Service (QoS).
QoS requirements in IoT are also application dependent and often conflicting. For
instance, smart healthcare services are commonly constrained by real-time demand and
low-latency requirements, where delays can degrade monitoring and decision support [3,4].

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

2 of 38

In contrast, multimedia and video-oriented IoT services (e.g., surveillance and streaming)
are highly sensitive to bandwidth fluctuations, buffering, and stalling events that degrade
the Quality of Experience (QoE) [5,6]. These practical constraints strengthen the case
for accurate traffic classification, since classification enables policy enforcement, anomaly
detection, and QoS-aware scheduling.
Traditional traffic classification methods, such as port-based identification and payload
inspection, are largely static and struggle to remain effective in modern IoT networks. With
the rapid emergence of new applications and evolving protocols, and the increasing use of
encryption, these conventional approaches become less reliable for accurate traffic identification [7]. Machine learning (ML)-based techniques improve adaptability by leveraging
statistical and temporal features. However, their performance remains strongly dependent
on the quality and completeness of the extracted features [8]. Deep learning (DL) methods
further reduce this dependency by learning discriminative representations directly from
raw packets or flows, enabling the improved recognition of complex traffic behaviors [9].
Nevertheless, many existing DL-based classifiers focus on a single traffic characteristic
(e.g., spatial, temporal, or frequency domain), which can limit their robustness and lead
to incomplete classification in realistic IoT scenarios [10–12]. This limitation encourages
the adoption of feature diversity, since different feature categories capture complementary traffic behaviors and can strengthen discrimination across heterogeneous conditions.
Specifically, general statistical features (e.g., packet size, inter-arrival time, and throughput)
provide a coarse-grained characterization of application traffic. Conversely, CNNs are
well-suited to learn protocol and flow signatures using spatial features generated from
payload/byte-level distributions [13]. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and LSTM
networks can efficiently describe temporal properties represented as packet sequences
to capture time-dependent correlations inside flows [14]. In addition, statistical features
(e.g., variance and skewness) capture burstiness and jitter effects, which are commonly
observed in real-time traffic [15]. While transform-domain features expose periodic patterns that may be weak in the time domain [16]. Therefore, relying on a single representation is frequently insufficient for consistent multiclass classification in real-world
IoT deployments.
Ensemble deep learning approaches seek to improve traffic classification by combining
the outputs of multiple models trained to learn complementary feature representations [17].
Common ensemble strategies include model averaging, bagging, boosting, and Mixture
of Experts (MoE), where several base learners are encouraged to specialize in different
characteristics of network traffic. For instance, CNNs are effective at capturing spatial
relationships in packet-level representations, whereas LSTMs are well suited for modeling
temporal dependencies in traffic flows. In addition, some ensemble designs incorporate autoencoders or transformer-based encoders to extract higher-level semantic representations
prior to decision fusion. By aggregating predictions from diverse learners, ensemble learning can yield more accurate and robust classification performance than a single model [18].
Despite this, one of the most prominent drawbacks of ensemble models for DL tasks
remains a lack of coordination among feature learning tasks. Although a number of tasks
within an ensemble might be learned toward distinct features, feature fusion might often
be performed at a later stage (i.e., for outputs directly), thus neglecting the relationships
among those features [19,20]. Additionally, conventional ensembles may fail to adapt to
input-specific properties dynamically. As a consequence, such ensembles may be less
likely to focus on more informative features for a particular data observation [21,22].
Furthermore, training and executing ensemble models tends to be more complex and
consumes additional memory. This might limit such models for use cases in real-time
environments in the Internet of Things. MoE models mitigate these limitations by using

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

3 of 38

a gating function to route each input to specialized expert networks. This enables inputadaptive computation and encourages expert specialization. However, MoE-based routing
and fusion remain underexplored for IoT traffic classification. In particular, limited work
has investigated how to jointly exploit multi-view traffic representations while maintaining
robust generalization across datasets and realistic traffic variability [23].
Existing DL traffic classifiers often focus on a single feature view, which can limit
robustness under heterogeneous IoT traffic conditions. Ensemble models can incorporate
multiple feature views, but they commonly rely on late, fixed fusion of model outputs,
which weakly coordinate feature learning and cannot adapt expert contributions to each
input flow. Moreover, MoE-based input-adaptive routing and fusion remain relatively
underexplored for IoT traffic classification. These gaps motivate a feature-specialized
MoE design that learns complementary traffic representations through dedicated experts
and combines them via dynamic gating and attention-based fusion to produce featureaware decisions.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
•

•

•

•

We develop an attention-driven Mixture of Experts (MoE) ensemble composed of five
deep networks, such as Dense, CNN, GRU, CAE, and LSTM. Each network specialized
to learn a distinct traffic modality (general, spatial, statistical, frequency domain, and
temporal), enabling a comprehensive representation of heterogeneous IoT traffic.
We introduce a dynamic gating network that assigns context-aware weights to expert
predictions. This enables the model to adaptively emphasize the most informative
feature views for each input flow, including encrypted or VPN-obfuscated traffic.
We propose an Attention-based Learnable Fusion (ALF) module that integrates gated
expert outputs via learnable attention scores, producing robust final decisions while
improving coordination among experts.
We evaluate ALF-MoE on three public benchmark datasets (ISCX VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic) and demonstrate consistent improvements over baseline
and ablated variants in terms of accuracy and the F1-score.

2. Related Work
The Internet of Things (IoT) connects diverse devices ranging from sensors and healthcare equipment to industrial machines. This connectivity enables continuous data streaming
through widely used application protocols such as Message Queuing Telemetry Transport
(MQTT), the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), and the Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) (MQTT, CoAP, and HTTP are application layer communication protocols widely
used to exchange data between IoT devices and services). The diverse range of IoT applications, including healthcare monitoring, smart city services, and autonomous transportation,
generates large volumes of complex and heterogeneous traffic [24]. However, IoT environments also face strong dynamism due to traffic congestion, security threats, protocol
incompatibilities, and varying Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, which complicate
reliable network management. As a result, traffic classification has become a critical capability for accurately identifying traffic types and supporting monitoring, control, and security
in IoT networks [17]. Reliable traffic analysis is increasingly important for understanding
device-specific communication behavior and supporting scalable learning-based network
intelligence under evolving conditions [25,26].
Traditional traffic classification methods typically rely on port numbers and payload
inspection. Port-based classification uses well-known ports to identify applications, but its
effectiveness has declined due to the widespread use of dynamic ports and tunneling protocols. Payload-based analysis examines packet contents for classification, but it becomes
unreliable as encryption standards such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) 1.3 become more

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

4 of 38

widely adopted. In addition, Virtual Private Network (VPN) tunneling further restricts
payload visibility, as traffic remains encrypted and unavailable for direct inspection. Moreover, port- and payload-driven approaches do not adapt well to rapidly evolving traffic
patterns and newly introduced cloud services [7].
Machine learning (ML)-based traffic classification uses algorithms such as decision
trees, support vector machines (SVMs), k-nearest neighbors (KNNs), and random forests to
classify traffic based on extracted features. These methods often outperform conventional
approaches because they learn from observed data rather than relying on fixed rules [8].
However, ML models typically require manual feature design and expert knowledge to
define suitable traffic features, such as packet sizes, inter-gap time, and flow time. Since
traffic patterns change continuously with new applications and protocols, ML models often
need frequent retraining to maintain high classification performance. In addition, complex
traffic data can be difficult for traditional ML methods because it may contain a hierarchical
structure and non-linear relationships among traffic variables [10].
A study in [27] investigates how machine learning can modernize existing network
infrastructure and improve performance. It reports that ML-based traffic classification
performs better in Software-Defined Networking (SDN) environments than traditional
methods, enabling more efficient and adaptive traffic handling. The authors also note that
integrating ML can strengthen SDN security. However, the study highlights that SDN
and machine learning solutions still face scalability and performance challenges. It also
points to open research directions, including more efficient data labeling, maintaining and
updating models to sustain classification accuracy, and linking classification improvements
to better QoS. In [28], the authors propose an SDN architecture that combines ML with
network slicing to improve scalability, automation, and real-time traffic management. The
framework applies feature scaling and k-means clustering to divide traffic and assign
optimal network slices. Among the five machine learning models evaluated, a feedforward network achieves the highest accuracy of 98.2%. The work also emphasizes a
key unresolved issue: collecting suitable data for real-time traffic classification and slice
assignment remains difficult, which affects QoS.
Ensemble methods and hybrid techniques that combine SVMs, decision trees, and
neural networks have shown strong effectiveness for traffic classification by leveraging
the complementary learning capabilities of multiple classifiers. These approaches often
improve generalization and robustness in large-scale networks, particularly when traffic
distributions are complex and diverse, and they can reduce the risk of overfitting. Alash
et al. [29] integrated a packet-level traffic classification scheme based on XGBoost into an
SDN architecture. Their method extracts EarlyStagePacket features directly in the SDN data
plane, reducing the overhead on the SDN controller. However, the scheme achieves only
about 91.8% accuracy on practical datasets and remains vulnerable to traffic encryption.
Omanga et al. [30] proposed a hybrid scheme combining SVM and a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) classifiers for flow-level traffic classification. While it is effective for traffic usage
profiling, it is not suitable for multi-class traffic classification under VPN traffic conditions.
Deep learning (DL) models are often more effective for classification because they
can automatically learn features directly from raw data. Unlike traditional approaches
that depend heavily on manual feature engineering, DL models can handle both simple
and complex patterns, and they typically perform better on large-scale classification tasks.
Recent studies, such as [31,32], apply image-based representations of packets and use
Vision Transformers (ViT) and CNNs for traffic classification. Specifically, ref. [31] proposes
a gray-scale image transformation combined with ViT and CNN to classify traffic without
handcrafted features. Similarly, ref. [32] introduces ATVITSC, which integrates a vision
transformer with LSTM-based spatiotemporal learning and dynamic weights to improve

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

5 of 38

the learning of encrypted traffic features. Although image-based inputs simplify preprocessing, relying primarily on visual representations may limit the model’s ability to capture
temporal and statistical characteristics important in dynamic traffic.
As discussed in [33–36], transformer models handle diverse traffic patterns using
masked autoencoders and self-attention. In [33], the authors propose a traffic transformer
that combines a masked autoencoder with hierarchical attention at both the flow and
packet levels. This design improves multi-level feature extraction, but it still relies on
static fusion strategies. In [34], MTC-MAE is introduced for malware traffic classification using self-supervised pretraining and fine-tuning to reduce label dependence, yet it
does not include dynamic expert adjustment. EncryptoVision in [35] extends transformerbased modeling with dual-modal fusion via triplet attention and transformer encoding
to better capture temporal evolution and spatiotemporal dependencies, but its fusion
remains inflexible. In [36], EAPT uses adversarial pretraining to tokenize encrypted traffic, and applies disentangled attention, which supports lightweight architectures. However, it primarily targets adversarial robustness and places less emphasis on multi-modal
feature fusion.
Methods for temporal and spatiotemporal modeling are discussed in [37,38]. In [37],
the L2-BiTCN-CNN model combines BiTCN and CNN layers to extract hierarchical features
from bytes and sessions. This design supports multi-scale feature extraction with attention
mechanisms, but its adaptability to heterogeneous traffic remains limited. Bimodal TrafficNet in [38] integrates a vision transformer branch with a statistical feature branch. It uses
cross-attention over statistical features to enhance feature combination. However, its final
fusion layer is static, which restricts dynamic adaptability. Works [39,40] focus on feature
interpretability and model robustness. In [39], feature selection improves interpretability,
but it relies on manually designed features. In [40], the emphasis is on model adaptability
and robustness against traffic classification attack scenarios. The study mainly provides a
vulnerability analysis of deep learning-based traffic classification under adversarial attacks.
Recent research has proposed diverse ensemble and hybrid deep learning models
for traffic classification in IoT and 5G networks. Study [41] combined an ensemble of
autoencoders with an SVM for traffic analysis in 5G slicing networks and showed strong
robustness under class-imbalanced conditions, but the method remained limited in scope.
Work [18] introduced a tree-based ensemble with a deep learning meta-model for network
traffic classification, improving generalization but relying heavily on decision tree-based
learners. In [17], traffic imbalance in software-defined IoT was addressed using costsensitive XGBoost with active learning, where applications are dynamically weighted to
improve accuracy and reduce computational cost. However, the approach is constrained by
feature-dependent processing. To handle evolving traffic patterns, ref. [42] proposed BotEnsIDS, which integrates bio-inspired optimizers with a CNN–LSTM hybrid deep learning
model and captures spatiotemporal features, but it requires extensive training epochs.
Meanwhile, ref. [43] presented AEWAE, a drift-adaptive ensemble framework optimized
using PSO and designed for concept drift in imbalanced IoT streams. Nevertheless, it
focuses mainly on anomaly-style settings rather than general multi-class traffic classification.
Overall, these models advance robustness and dynamic feature learning, but limitations
such as feature dependency, computational overhead, and limited generalizability persist.
Mixture of Experts (MoE) is an ensemble-style learning approach that divides a model
into multiple expert subnetworks and a gating network. The gating network selects
the most suitable expert, or a small subset of experts, for each input sample. MoE is
not a new concept. It was introduced in the early 1990s, with the classic formulation
reported in 1991 [44]. The framework was further extended in the mid-1990s, including
hierarchical mixtures of experts proposed by Jordan and Jacobs in 1994 [45]. MoE regained

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

6 of 38

strong attention in modern deep learning after the sparsely gated MoE model by Shazeer
et al. (2017), which demonstrated efficient scaling through sparse routing [46]. Today,
MoE is well-suited to network traffic classification because traffic is highly heterogeneous
across applications, devices, protocols, and usage patterns [47]. Experts can specialize
in complementary feature views, such as temporal behavior, statistical patterns, headerlevel cues, and characteristics of encrypted or VPN traffic. Sparse routing also improves
efficiency, since only selected experts are activated for each flow, increasing capacity without
paying the full inference cost every time.
Recent MoE-based studies show that expert routing can improve both the accuracy
and efficiency of traffic analysis, especially under encryption and heterogeneous conditions.
The work [48] uses a teacher–student distillation strategy and treats compact GPT-2-derived
models as experts, which are selected by a gating network for encrypted traffic classification.
Its main advantage is a strong accuracy–efficiency trade-off through distillation, pruning,
and contextual feature embedding, which supports resource-constrained edge deployment.
However, it depends on LLM-style components and careful distillation, which increases
implementation complexity. The proposed method in [49] combines contrastive learning
with a Vision Mixture of Experts by constructing a packet–temporal matrix and applying
dynamic expert routing in a vertical ViT-MoE design. It improves representation learning
and generalization with limited labels, but its image-like representation and transformerbased routing can increase computational cost and require careful tuning for stable training.
The work in [50] uses a multi-gated MoE design with multiple expert sub-models
and a final tower network. Its main strength is its scalability, because it can integrate
pretrained experts and support task expansion over time. This makes it suitable for multiattribute prediction, such as application type, encapsulation usage, and malicious behaviors.
However, multiple gates and expansion modes increase the system’s complexity and require
careful coordination during training and deployment. Traffic-MoE [51] targets real-time
and throughput-sensitive environments by sparsely routing inputs to only a small subset
of experts. It improves throughput, and reduces latency and memory usage, but it relies on
specialized routing and pretraining pipelines that may be sensitive to distribution shifts.
A simpler MoE [47] that combines Dense, CNN, and LSTM experts is easy to implement
and captures complementary feature views. However, full input expert processing can still
add overhead and may not address encryption or drift unless explicitly evaluated. Table 1
shows the limitations and advantages of the existing works.
Table 1. Comparison of existing related works.

S. No

Refs.

1

[31]

2

[32]

3

[33]

Advantages

Limitations

Transforms packets into gray-scale images and
applies ViT/CNN for automatic feature learning
without handcrafted features.
Combines a vision transformer with LSTM-based
spatiotemporal learning and dynamic weights
for encrypted traffic features.
Uses a masked autoencoder with hierarchical
flow- and packet-level attention for multi-level
feature extraction.

Image-style representation can weaken the
modeling of temporal and statistical dynamics in
traffic.
Still relies on image-like inputs; may miss
fine-grained temporal/statistical cues under
dynamic traffic.
Fusion remains largely static; limited
sample-wise adaptive adjustment.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

7 of 38

Table 1. Cont.

S. No

Ref.

4

[34]

5

[35]

6

[36]

7

[37]

8

[38]

9

[44–46]

10

[48]

11

[49]

12

[50]

13

[51]

14

[47]

Advantage
Applies self-supervised pretraining and
fine-tuning to reduce label dependence in
traffic classification.
Introduces dual-modal fusion with triplet
attention and transformer encoding to capture
temporal evolution and
spatiotemporal dependencies.
Uses adversarial pretraining and disentangled
attention for tokenizing encrypted traffic and
supporting lightweight models.
Combines BiTCN and CNN to learn
hierarchical features from bytes and sessions
with attention mechanisms.
Uses a bimodal design (ViT branch +
statistical-feature branch) with cross-attention
for feature enhancement.
Establishes MoE foundations (gating,
hierarchical MoE, and sparse MoE) to scale
capacity efficiently via routing.
Uses distilled LLM experts with gated routing
for scalable encrypted traffic classification and
reduced inference cost.
Combines contrastive learning with a vision
MoE (vertical ViT-MoE) using dynamic routing
for encrypted traffic.
Applies multi-gated MoE for multi-attribute
traffic analysis and supports efficient
task expansion.
Sparse routing activates only a subset of experts,
improving throughput and reducing
latency/memory for real-time analysis.
Simple MoE using Dense/CNN/LSTM experts
captures complementary feature views for
multi-class traffic classification.

Limitation
Does not incorporate dynamic expert routing or
input-adaptive multi-view fusion.
Feature fusion is relatively inflexible and not
strongly input adaptive.
Focuses mainly on adversarial robustness;
limited emphasis on multi-view
adaptive fusion.
Adaptability to heterogeneous traffic remains
limited, especially across diverse applications.
Final fusion is static, which restricts dynamic
adaptability across classes and datasets.
Not traffic specific; practical gains depend on
routing stability and deployment constraints.
Requires distillation/pruning pipeline and
LLM-style components, increasing
implementation complexity.
Transformer routing and image-style inputs
increase computation and require careful tuning
for stability.
Multiple gates and expansion modes increase
system complexity and coordination effort.
Relies on specialized routing and pretraining;
can be sensitive to distribution shifts.
Full input expert processing can still add
overhead and may not address drift/encryption
without explicit evaluation.

3. Methodology
This section introduces the proposed Attention-based Learnable Fusion of Specialized
Mixture of Expert Networks (ALF-MoE) for accurate traffic classification. ALF-MoE is an
ensemble deep learning framework designed to enhance traffic classification by integrating
five specialized expert networks, such as Dense, CNN, GRU, Convolutional Autoencoder,
and LSTM. Each expert independently processes the complete input to capture unique
characteristics from different feature domains. A dynamic gating network computes
context-aware attention weights for each expert output. These attention-weighted predictions are subsequently fused through the Attentive Learnable Fusion (ALF) module,
enabling robust and accurate final classification. ALF-MoE’s overall architecture is shown
in Figure 1. Table 2 shows the mathematical notations used in this paper.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

8 of 38

Figure 1. Overall architecture of ALF MoE, including expert networks, dynamic gating network, and
ALF module.
Table 2. Mathematical notations used in ALF-MoE.
Notation

Description

D = {( xi , yi )}iN=1

Dataset of N samples.

xi

i-th input traffic sample.

yi ∈ {1, . . . , C }

Class label of xi among C classes.

C

Number of classes.

xi

(d)

Domain-specific input of xi for domain d ∈ { g, sp, st, f , t} (general, spatial,
statistical, frequency, and temporal).

Ek

k-th expert model, k ∈ {1, . . . , K } (Dense, CNN, GRU, CAE, and LSTM);
K = 5.

ϕk (·; θk )

Feature extractor of expert Ek with parameters θk .

(k)
p̂i
W(k) , b(k)

Class probability vector predicted by expert Ek for xi .

(k)
LCE

Cross-entropy loss for expert Ek .

gi = [ gi,1 , . . . , gi,K ]

Pre-softmax gating scores for K experts.

αi,k

Gating weight for expert Ek (softmax over gi ), ∑kK=1 αi,k = 1.

Wg , bg

Parameters of the gating/attention projection layer.

ai,k

Refined attention score for expert Ek after projection.

zi

Fused representation (ALF output) computed from weighted expert outputs.

Wf , bf

Parameters of the final classifier.

ŷi

Final predicted class probability vector (softmax output).

Classification head parameters of expert Ek .

3.1. Data Preprocessing
The input consists of raw network traffic data from different applications. Let
the dataset be denoted as D = {( xi , yi )}iN=1 , where xi is the ith traffic sample and

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

9 of 38

yi ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C } is its class label among C classes. Each sample xi is represented by
a raw feature vector ri ∈ RF extracted from the dataset.
To avoid leakage-driven performance, we explicitly remove all direct identifiers from
ri when present, including the source/destination IP addresses, source/destination ports,
flow/session identifiers, and timestamps. The resulting feature vector is denoted as r̃i .
All continuous features in r̃i are standardized using z-score normalization:
xi = Norm(r̃i ) =

r̃i − µ
,
σ

(1)

where µ and σ are the per-feature mean and standard deviation.
3.2. Expert Networks
Feature extraction is essential for traffic classification. Using informative features can
improve accuracy and reduce computation and memory cost. However, a single deep
learning model usually focuses on one feature type. This can limit performance, reduce
generalization, and increase overfitting.
To address this, the proposed ALF-MoE processes each input instance xi with multiple
experts. Each expert learns a different representation of the same traffic sample. We
construct five feature domains: general (x g ), spatial (xs ), statistical (xv ), frequency (x f ), and
temporal (xt ). These domains are derived deterministically from xi and passed to their
corresponding experts. Let x g,i , xs,i , xv,i , x f ,i , and xt,i denote the domain-specific inputs for
sample xi .
From the normalized feature vector xi ∈ RF , we build five domain inputs using fixed
lengths ( Fg , Ls , Tv , dv , L f , and Tt ) and a fixed feature order. Therefore, the same sample
always produces the same tensors.
General input. The general vector x g,i ∈ RFg is the first Fg features of xi :
x g,i = xi [1 : Fg ].

(2)

Spatial input. The spatial input xs,i ∈ R Ls ×1 is formed by selecting the first Ls features
and reshaping:
xs,i = Reshape(xi [1 : Ls ]) ∈ R Ls ×1 .
(3)
This format allows the CNN expert to capture local feature interactions.
Statistical input. The statistical sequence xv,i ∈ RTv ×dv is formed from the first Tv dv
features and reshaped into Tv steps:
xv,i = Reshape(xi [1 : Tv dv ]) ∈ RTv ×dv .

(4)

This sequence is used by the GRU expert.
Frequency input. We first build a length-L f signal ui ∈ R L f from xi :
u i = x i [1 : L f ].

(5)

We apply a Hann window w[n] to reduce spectral leakage:
ui′ [n] = ui [n] · w[n],

n = 1, . . . , L f .

(6)

Then, we compute the FFT magnitude:
x f ,i = F (ui′ ) ∈ R L f ×1 .

(7)

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

10 of 38

If needed, x f ,i is padded or truncated to length L f .
Temporal input. The temporal sequence xt,i ∈ RTt ×1 is formed from the last Tt features:
xt,i = Reshape(xi [ F − Tt + 1 : F ]) ∈ RTt ×1 .

(8)

This sequence is used by the LSTM expert.
3.3. Expert Networks Class Prediction
3.3.1. Dense Network Expert
The Dense Network expert is designed to capture global, non-sequential statistical
characteristics from traffic data. It processes the general feature vector x g,i , extracted from
the input sample xi , which includes flow-level attributes such as packet count, byte count,
flow duration, and entropy-based measures. To model complex, non-linear interactions
among these general features, a two-layer feed-forward neural network is used. Each layer
applies an affine transformation followed by a non-linear activation function. The output
(Dense)

representation zi

of the Dense expert is computed as follows:

(Dense)

zi
( g)

where W1

( g)

and W2





( g)
( g)
( g)
( g)
= σ W2 · σ W1 · x g,i + b1
+ b2

(9)

are the weight matrices of the first and second layers, respectively,

( g)
( g)
b1 and b2 are the corresponding bias vectors, and σ(·) denotes a non-linear activation

function such as ReLU.
3.3.2. Convolutional Neural Network
The CNN expert is designed to capture spatial characteristics inherent in network
traffic data. It uses convolutional operations to detect local dependencies and spatial
patterns, which are critical for identifying byte-level bursts and the structural similarities
common to specific application layer protocols. The spatial feature vector is xs,i , which
is derived from the raw input sample xi and typically includes representations such as
byte histograms or two-dimensional packet matrices. These are reshaped to form an input
tensor xs,i ∈ Rh×w , where h and w denote the height and width of the 2D matrix.
The CNN expert applies a 2D convolutional layer followed by a non-linear activation
(ReLU), and then flattens the output into a feature vector for further processing. The overall
transformation can be expressed as follows:
(CNN)

zi

= Flatten(ReLU(Conv2D( xs,i ; θcnn ))),

(10)

where θcnn denotes the trainable parameters of the convolutional layer.
3.3.3. GRU Expert
The GRU expert is designed to capture statistical patterns in the traffic data over time.
It processes the statistical feature vector xv,i extracted from the input sample xi , which
includes sequential attributes such as packet lengths and inter-arrival intervals. These
features are modeled as a time series:
n
o
(t) T
xv,i = xv,i

t =1

The GRU cell operates on this sequence using the following set of equations:

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

11 of 38



z t = σ W z x ( t ) + U z h t −1


r t = σ W r x ( t ) + U r h t −1


h̃t = tanh Wh x(t) + Uh (rt ⊙ ht−1 )

(11)

ht = (1 − zt ) ⊙ ht−1 + zt ⊙ h̃t
Here, zt and rt are the update and reset gates, respectively. h̃t is the candidate
activation and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
The final hidden state h T summarizes the learned temporal representation:
(GRU)

zi

= hT

(12)

3.3.4. Convolutional Autoencoder
The Convolutional Autoencoder expert is designed to extract frequency-domain features x f ,i , typically obtained by applying a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) on raw traffic
sequences xi . The CAE encodes these features into a latent representation zCAE
∈ Rd via
i
the encoder network, and then reconstructs them through a decoder to produce x̃ f ,i . This
process captures both discriminative and reconstructive patterns in frequency space. The
encoding and decoding operations are defined as follows:


zCAE
=
σ
W
·
x
+
b
,
(13)
e
e
f
,i
i


x̃ f ,i = σ Wd · zCAE
+ bd ,
(14)
i
where We , Wd and be , bd are the weight matrices and bias vectors of the encoder and decoder,
respectively, and σ (·) denotes a non-linear activation function (ReLU). The CAE is trained
using a composite loss function that integrates classification accuracy, reconstruction fidelity,
and regularization:
(4)

L(4) = λcls LCE + λrec

2
1 N
x f ,i − x̃ f ,i + λ4 ∥θ4 ∥22 ,
∑
N i =1
2

(15)

(4)

where LCE is the cross-entropy loss for classification, the second term is the mean squared
reconstruction error, and the final term represents the L2 regularization on the CAE parameters θ4 . The hyperparameters λcls , λrec , λ4 are regularization coefficients.
3.3.5. Long Short-Term Memory Expert
The LSTM expert is specifically designed to extract temporal sequences
(1)

(2)

(T )

(t)

xt,i = { xt,i , xt,i , . . . , xt,i }, where each xt,i represents a time-ordered feature vector
(e.g., packet inter-arrival times or session timelines). The LSTM unit effectively captures
long-range dependencies and periodic behaviors in IoT traffic.
Each LSTM cell operates through a sequence of gating mechanisms:
f t = σ (W f x t + U f h t − 1 + b f )

(Forget gate)

(16)

it = σ (Wi xt + Ui ht−1 + bi )

(Input gate)

(17)

(Cell candidate)

(18)

(Cell state update)

(19)

ot = σ (Wo xt + Uo ht−1 + bo )

(Output gate)

(20)

ht = ot ⊙ tanh(ct )

(Hidden state)

(21)

c̃t = tanh(Wc xt + Uc ht−1 + bc )
ct = f t ⊙ ct−1 + it ⊙ c̃t

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

12 of 38

Here, σ (·) denotes the sigmoid activation, tanh(·) is the hyperbolic tangent function,
and ⊙ represents element-wise multiplication. The matrices W{·} , U{·} and bias vectors
b{·} are learnable parameters of the LSTM.
Finally, the output of the LSTM expert for sample i is the final hidden state after T
time steps:
(LSTM)

zi

= hT

(22)

This latent vector encodes temporal dynamics critical for detecting complex and
stealthy patterns in application layer flows.
Each expert model processes its respective input features and produces a class probability distribution using a softmax activation function. This enables each expert to independently assess the likelihood of the input belonging to each target class. The softmax
output reflects the expert’s confidence based on the type of features it specializes in, such as
statistical, spatial, or temporal patterns. The ALF module later integrates these individual
probability distributions to generate the final classification decision.
Each expert model Ek produces a class probability distribution:
(k)

ŷi

= Ek ( xi ),
(k)

ŷi

(k)

ŷi

∈ RC ,

k ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}.
(k)

= softmax(W (k) ϕk ( xi ; θk ) + b(k) ),

(23)

where ϕk (·) is the feature extractor function of expert k, parameterized by θk , and W (k) and
b(k) are the parameters of the classification head.
Each expert’s classification loss is calculated using categorical cross-entropy as follows:

L(k) = −



1 N C
(k)
yic log ŷic + λk ∥θk ∥22 .
∑
∑
N i =1 c =1

(24)

These domain-specialized predictions will later be dynamically weighted and fused
through the proposed Attentive Learnable Fusion (ALF) module to form the final output.
3.4. Gating Network
To enable adaptive expert selection, the proposed ALF-MoE model incorporates a dynamic gating network that computes context-aware confidence scores for each specialized
expert. The proposed Gating Network with Attention Refinement is shown in Figure 2. The
gating network is a deep multilayer architecture that computes dynamic, context-aware
expert weights for the MoE model. Initially, the raw input features are passed through a
dense layer followed by a ReLU activation to capture non-linear patterns. A dropout layer is
employed next to mitigate overfitting and promote generalization. Given an input instance
xi , the gating network G (·) computes a raw score vector g = [ g1 , g2 , g3 , g4 , g5 ] = G ( xi ),
where each score gk reflects the contribution confidence of the corresponding expert Ek . The
output is then fed into another dense layer with a softmax activation, producing normalized
weights indicating the importance of each expert network.
αk =

exp( gk )
.
5
∑ j=1 exp( g j )

(25)

This ensures that the sum of weights across all experts is 1.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

13 of 38

Figure 2. Work flow of dynamic gating network for generating sample-wise expert weights from the
input features.

To further enhance the selectivity and contextual awareness of the expert weighting,
the softmax-normalized outputs are refined via an attention-based transformation using an
additional dense layer followed by a tanh activation, resulting in adaptive attention scores.
Each expert’s attention weight ak is computed using a learnable linear transformation of
the raw score αk :
ak = so f tmax (W g · log(α) + bg ),
(26)
where W g and bg are the parameters of the attention projection layer.
This mechanism enables the gating network not only to reflect the relative confidence
in each expert but also to adaptively focus on the most relevant predictors depending on
the input characteristics. The resulting attention weights a = [ a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 , a5 ] are then
passed to the ALF fusion module for final decision aggregation. This design improves the
model’s ability to balance contributions from multiple feature domains, thus enhancing
classification robustness and accuracy in diverse traffic scenarios.
3.5. Fusion Strategy in ALF-MoE
The Attention-based Learnable Fusion (ALF) module in the proposed ALF-MoE
architecture is designed to effectively integrate the outputs from multiple specialized expert
networks into a robust final classification decision. The individual expert predictions and
the gating network’s attention scores are aggregated via a weighted summation, with
each expert’s output scaled by its corresponding attention weight to produce a unified,
context-aware representation. The aggregated prediction vector obtained from the mixture
of expert networks is calculated as follows:
5

z = ∑ ak · y(k) ,

(27)

k =1

where z ∈ RC is the latent fused representation.
The architecture of the ALF module is shown in Figure 3. The aggregated vector z
is first passed through a fully connected dense layer to capture high-level interactions
between the expert outputs. A tanh activation function follows, introducing non-linearity
and enabling the network to model complex relationships across expert domains. A second
dense layer then processes the transformed representation to project it back into the class
space. Finally, a softmax activation function is applied to produce a normalized probability
distribution over the classes.


yfinal = softmax W f · tanh(z) + b f ,

(28)

where W f ∈ RC×C and b f ∈ RC are trainable parameters of the final classification layer.
The use of tanh introduces non-linear dependencies among expert outputs, enabling the
model to resolve ambiguous input cases and adapt to heterogeneous traffic patterns with
enhanced accuracy. This layered transformation pipeline ensures that the fusion process is

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

14 of 38

both adaptive and learnable, enabling the model to dynamically recalibrate the contribution
of each expert prediction based on the context of the input sample, ultimately improving
classification robustness and accuracy. The details of the ALF-MoE training process is
shown in Algorithm 1.

Figure 3. Architecture of the ALF module for weighted aggregation of multi-expert features.

Algorithm 1 ALF-MoE: Attention-Based Learnable Fusion of Specialized Mixture of
Expert Networks
Require: Input instance xi
Ensure: Predicted class label ŷ
for Each expert model Ek ∈ {Dense, CNN, GRU, CAE, and LSTM} do
Extract domain-specific feature vector from input xi
(k)

Compute expert prediction ŷi = Ek ( xi )
end for
Pass xi to the Gating Network;
Compute attention logits gk for each expert
Normalize the attention
scores with softmax:
g
ak = Ke k g j ;
∑ j =1 e

(k)

Compute fused prediction: z = ∑kK=1 ak · ŷi
Pass z through the Learnable Fusion Layer:
ŷ = softmax(W f · tanh(z) + b f )
return ŷ

4. Experiment and Performance Evaluation
This section presents the experimental evaluation conducted on two publicly available
datasets to benchmark the proposed ALF-MoE framework against several state-of-theart models. The experiments are designed to comprehensively assess the framework’s
classification accuracy, robustness, and generalization capability across diverse network
traffic scenarios.
4.1. Dataset Description
We assessed the effectiveness of the proposed traffic classification framework using
two widely adopted IoT benchmark datasets: ISCX VPN-nonVPN [52] and Unicauca [53].
These datasets encompass a diverse range of IoT network traffic categories, capturing both
encrypted and unencrypted communication patterns. Their comprehensive coverage of
application-level behaviors enables a robust and reliable evaluation of the model’s ability
to accurately classify complex IoT traffic scenarios.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

15 of 38

4.1.1. ISCX VPN-NonVPN Dataset
The ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset [52], developed by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity at the University of New Brunswick, remains a respected basis for research
regarding classification tasks for encrypted and VPN traffic. This dataset simulates real
user behavior using two personas: Alice and Bob. This ranges from simple browsing to
such tasks as sending emails, streaming videos, instant messaging, transferring files, voice
over IP communications, and peer-to-peer transactions. This data is measured in a typical
network environment as well as a network with VPN encryption. The types of traffic
included come from common uses such as Skype, YouTube, Facebook, and BitTorrent.
All this data breaks down primarily into several major types: VOIP, VPN-VOIP, P2P, and
VPN-P2P.
4.1.2. Unicauca Dataset
This dataset is a large-scale and realistic network traffic dataset collected by Universidad del Cauca, Colombia [53]. It was collected using packet capturing processes that
were performed at different points in time: in the morning and afternoon periods. All
this data was collected for several days distributed throughout April and June 2019. This
resulted in a total of 2,704,839 flow records with 50 flow-level features expressed in a
CSV format. Among these features are source and destination IP addresses and ports.
Additionally, other general properties comprise the duration of flows, interarrival time for
flows, sizes for data packets, and Layer 7 protocols. All of these elements establish ground
truth classifications. The wide time span for data collection along with the wide coverage
of application protocols makes this dataset a realistic representation of traffic conditions.
4.1.3. UNSW-IoTraffic Dataset
The UNSW-IoTraffic dataset [54] was developed primarily at the University of New
South Wales (UNSW Sydney), Australia. The dataset contains real-world IoT communications captured over an extended period. The dataset is released in three complementary
components: (i) raw network packet traces with full headers and payloads, (ii) flowlevel metadata that summarizes fine-grained bidirectional communication behaviors, and
(iii) protocol parameters that describe network protocol characteristics. In addition, the
dataset provides protocol data models for six dominant protocols: TLS, HTTP, DNS, DHCP,
SSDP, and NTP. The capture includes 95.5 million packets collected over 203 days. The
raw packet traces are organized into 27 per-device packet capture (PCAP) files, reflecting
device-specific traffic behavior.
4.2. Experimental Setup
To evaluate the performance of the proposed ALF-MoE framework, experiments were
conducted on two publicly available datasets: ISCX VPN-nonVPN and Unicauca. The
datasets were partitioned into 70% for training, 10% for validation, and 20% for testing.
The validation subset was used for hyperparameter tuning. Training was performed over
50 epochs using ten-fold cross-validation to ensure robustness and mitigate bias. The model
was optimized using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 and a batch size of
64. To reduce overfitting and ensure stable convergence, L2 regularization was applied. All
models were implemented in Python 3.9.25 utilizing TensorFlow and Keras libraries. The
experiments were executed on a system equipped with a 12th-generation Intel(R) Core(TM)
i5-12600K CPU operating at 3.69 GHz, 48 GB RAM, running Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS with Linux
kernel version 5.13. Data processing and visualization were performed using the NumPy
2.0.2, Pandas 2.3.3, Matplotlib 3.9.2, and Seaborn 0.13.2 libraries.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

16 of 38

4.3. Training Details
To validate the robustness of the proposed ALF-MoE model, the class labels were
encoded using LabelEncoder and converted to one-hot vectors. All input features were
normalized using StandardScaler fitted on the training data only, and the same scaling
parameters were applied to the validation and test splits. The normalized feature vector
was then deterministically transformed into five domain-specific inputs: general, spatial,
statistical, frequency, and temporal. These inputs were reshaped to match the expert
formats, i.e., RFg for the Dense expert, R Ls ×1 for the CNN expert, RTv ×dv for the GRU
expert, R L f ×1 for the CAE expert, and RTt ×1 for the LSTM expert. A fixed random seed
(random_state = 42) was used for data splitting to ensure consistent results. The model
parameters were optimized using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 , β 1 = 0.9,
β 2 = 0.999, and ϵ = 10−8 . The model was trained by minimizing the categorical crossentropy loss. Dropout with a rate of 0.3 was applied in the expert networks and gating layers
to reduce overfitting. For expert fusion, all expert outputs were projected to a common
latent dimension of 64 before being weighted by the gating network and aggregated.
Training was performed for a maximum of 50 epochs using a batch size of 32, and a
held-out validation set was used to monitor convergence.
4.4. Evaluation Metrics
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed framework, we utilize standard evaluation metrics commonly adopted in machine learning. In particular, we compute overall
accuracy, precision, and recall to assess how accurately the model classifies traffic flows
into their corresponding categories.
•

Accuracy: The proportion of total correct predictions to the total number of predictions made.
TP + TN
Accuracy =
(29)
TP + FP + TN + FN

•

Precision: The proportion of correctly predicted positive observations to the total
predicted positives.
TP
(30)
Precision =
TP + FP

•

Recall (Sensitivity): The proportion of actual positive cases that were correctly identified.
Recall =

•

TP
TP + FN

(31)

F1-Score: The harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a balance between
the two.
2 · Precision · Recall
F1-Score =
(32)
Precision + Recall

After the classification process, correctly identified samples of a particular class are
recorded as True Positives (TP). In contrast, correctly classified instances of all other classes
are treated as True Negatives (TN). Conversely, misclassified samples are recorded as either
False Positives (FP) or False Negatives (FN), depending on whether their predicted and
actual class labels match.
4.5. Performance Analysis of ALF-MoE
Figure 4 illustrates the overall training behavior of the proposed ALF-MoE model on
the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset. Figure 4a presents the training and validation accuracy
curves of the proposed ALF-MoE model over 50 epochs on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset.
The model exhibits rapid convergence within the first ten epochs, followed by a plateau,

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

17 of 38

indicating that the learning process has stabilized. Notably, the alignment between training
and validation accuracy remains consistently close throughout the training period, demonstrating minimal divergence. This close correspondence is a strong indicator of the model’s
generalization capability and suggests that overfitting is effectively mitigated. The high
and stable validation accuracy further substantiates the efficacy of the learned gating mechanism and the integrated regularized loss function, both of which contribute to balanced
expert selection and robust model performance. The convergence behavior confirms that
the ALF-MoE architecture successfully harmonizes learning and specialization without
compromising accuracy.
Figure 4b presents the training and validation loss curves over 50 epochs on the ISCX
VPN-nonVPN dataset. At the beginning of training, the loss drops quickly, showing that the
model is learning well from the start. This rapid improvement is due to the combination of
a standard loss function (categorical cross-entropy) and an additional term that encourages
all expert models to contribute evenly. After about ten training rounds (epochs), both the
training and validation losses stabilize and decrease smoothly, indicating that the model
is learning steadily without sudden jumps or instability. This is important because many
MoE models can become unstable if certain experts dominate. The smooth loss curves
indicate that the training process is well controlled, and the learning rate and optimizer are
working effectively.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. Accuracy and loss curves for training and validation of the ALF-MoE model in the ISCX
VPN-non VPN dataset. (a) Model accuracy. (b) Model loss.

The overall learning behavior of the proposed ALF-MoE model on the Unicauca dataset
is depicted in Figure 5. The overall learning behavior of the proposed ALF-MoE model on
the Unicauca dataset, depicted in Figure 5a, shows how the training and validation accuracy
of the ALF-MoE model changes over 50 training rounds using the Unicauca dataset. The
model quickly improves over the first ten epochs and then stabilizes, indicating it has learned
well. The accuracy for both training and validation remains close, indicating that the model is
not overfitting and performs well on new data. The strong, stable validation accuracy also
shows that the gating network and regularized loss are working effectively, selecting the right
experts during training and helping the model remain consistent.
The overall learning behavior of the proposed ALF-MoE model on the Unicauca
dataset, depicted in Figure 5b, shows how the training and validation loss values change
over time for the ALF-MoE model on the Unicauca dataset. At the beginning of training,
the loss drops quickly, indicating the model is learning effectively. This fast learning is
due to the combination of standard loss (categorical cross-entropy) and an extra term
that encourages all experts to be used fairly. After around ten epochs, the loss curves
become stable and smooth, with no sudden jumps or drops. This stable trend indicates

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

18 of 38

that the model is training reliably, which is important for ensemble models, which can
sometimes become unstable when one expert dominates. The steady behavior indicates
that the learning rate and optimizer are correctly set, helping the model learn efficiently.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. Accuracy and loss curves for training and validation of the ALF-MoE model in the
Unicauca dataset. (a) Model accuracy. (b) Model loss.

The overall learning behavior of the proposed ALF-MoE model on the UNSW-IoTraffic
dataset is shown in Figure 6. Figure 6a illustrates the training and validation accuracy
over 50 epochs. The model improves rapidly during the first few epochs and reaches
a high-accuracy region early in training. The training and validation accuracy remain
close throughout, which indicates good generalization and limited overfitting. This stable
validation trend suggests that the gating network is learning consistent expert weights and
that the regularization settings help maintain robust performance on unseen samples.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6. Accuracy and loss curves for training and validation of the ALF-MoE model in the UNSWIoTraffic dataset. (a) Model accuracy. (b) Model loss.

Figure 6b presents the corresponding training and validation loss curves for the
UNSW-IoTraffic dataset. The loss decreases sharply at the beginning, showing that the
model learns discriminative patterns quickly. After the initial drop, both curves flatten
and remain steady, which indicates convergence and stable optimization. The validation
loss stays close to the training loss, with small variations across epochs. This behavior
is desirable for an ensemble MoE model, where unstable expert selection can sometimes
cause oscillations.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

19 of 38

Figure 7 presents the normalized confusion matrices of the proposed ALF-MoE model
on three datasets: (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN, (b) Unicauca, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic. In
Figure 7a, the ISCX VPN-nonVPN results show strong classification across all 18 classes,
with most samples concentrated along the diagonal. The remaining off-diagonal values
are small and mainly appear between classes with similar traffic characteristics, such as
STR-YOUTUBE and STR-NETFLIX, and among CHAT-GMAIL, CHAT-HANGOUTS, and
EMAIL. This pattern is expected because these applications share overlapping protocol
behavior and statistical properties. Overall, the low off-diagonal percentages indicate that
ALF-MoE maintains high class separability even in fine-grained multi-class settings.
Figure 7b shows the normalized confusion matrix for the Unicauca dataset, which
contains five coarse-grained application categories. The matrix is nearly perfectly diagonal,
indicating consistently high recall for all categories and minimal confusion. The clearer
separation is expected due to the reduced number of classes and higher-level labeling,
which lowers the ambiguity between categories. Figure 7c reports the normalized confusion
matrix for the UNSW-IoTraffic dataset using the selected IoT device classes. The diagonal
dominance confirms that ALF-MoE can distinguish device-level traffic patterns effectively.
The small off-diagonal entries occur mainly among devices with similar communication
behaviors and shared protocol usage, which can produce comparable flow signatures.
Despite this, the overall diagonal structure remains strong, indicating reliable generalization
to IoT-specific traffic.
Figure 8 evaluates the classification capability of the ALF-MoE model using ROCAUC curves across three datasets. In Figure 8a, which presents the results for the ISCX
VPN-nonVPN dataset, the ROC curves for nearly all classes are tightly clustered near the
top left corner of the graph, indicating near-perfect true positive rates with very low false
positive rates. The AUC values for most classes approach 1.00, demonstrating that the
model achieves excellent separability across diverse traffic classes, including encrypted
and non-encrypted flows. A few classes, such as STR-YOUTUBE and STR-NETFLIX, show
slightly lower AUCs (e.g., 0.89 and 0.93), likely due to overlapping traffic patterns or smaller
class distributions, but overall the model achieves robust multi-class discrimination. In
Figure 8b, the ROC-AUC curves for the Unicauca dataset reflect similar high classification
performance. The AUC for most categories, such as Database, Media, and SocialNetwork,
reaches 1.00, indicating perfect classification. The Web class yields an AUC of 0.949, which,
although slightly lower, still reflects strong performance. The Chat class shows a lower
AUC of 0.969, possibly due to its overlap with other categories in terms of flow-level
features. Overall, the model’s performance remains consistent across datasets with varying
granularity and class definitions, underlining the generalization capability of the ALF-MoE
architecture and its ability to maintain high discrimination across both fine-grained and
coarse-grained traffic classifications. In Figure 8c, the ROC-AUC curves for the UNSWIoTraffic dataset indicate consistently strong discrimination across the selected IoT device
classes. Most devices achieve an AUC close to 1.00, such as AmazonEcho, AugustDoorBell,
AwairAirQuality, CanaryCamera, HPPrinter, LiFXBulb, and SamsungSmartThings, which
suggests near-perfect separability in terms of their traffic patterns. TPLinkSmartPlug
records a slightly lower AUC, but it still reflects excellent classification capability. The tight
clustering of the ROC curves near the top left corner further confirms the model’s robustness
on device-level IoT traffic, where many devices share common protocols and background
communication behaviors.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

20 of 38

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 7. Normalized confusion matrix of ALF-MoE model in (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset,
(b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

Figure 9 shows the precision–recall (PR) curves for the proposed ALF-MoE model evaluated on three datasets: the (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN, (b) Unicauca, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic
dataset. Each curve represents how well the model balances precision (correct predictions
among predicted positives) and recall (correct predictions among actual positives) for different classes. On the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset, most classes show near-perfect precision
and recall, as evidenced by curves near the top right corner, with the Area Under the Curve
(AUC) scores close to 1.00, indicating excellent classification performance across diverse
encrypted traffic types. For the Unicauca dataset, the PR curves are also tightly grouped
toward the upper right, reflecting strong performance and minimal class confusion. The
average precision values confirm that the model maintains high accuracy across all classes.
This illustrates the model’s ability to generalize across datasets with varying traffic and
application types. For the UNSW-IoTraffic dataset, the PR curves also demonstrate strong
device-level discrimination. Several device classes achieve an average precision (AP) of
1.00, indicating highly reliable detection across thresholds. A few classes show slightly

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

21 of 38

lower AP values, such as CanaryCamera (AP ≈ 0.90), SamsungSmartThings (AP ≈ 0.96),
and TPLinkSmartPlug (AP ≈ 0.98), which suggests mild overlap in traffic behavior among
certain IoT devices.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 8. ROC-AUC curve comparison of the proposed ALF-MoE model on (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN
dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

Table 3 presents a detailed per-class performance evaluation of the proposed ALFMoE model on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset, highlighting its ability to distinguish
among 20 diverse application traffic categories effectively. The model achieves perfect
classification performance (100% accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score) across several
categories, including AUDIO-FACEBOOK, AUDIO-SKYPE, AUDIO-VOIPBUSTER, CHATHANGOUTS, STR-SPOTIFY, and VIDEO-SKYPE. This indicates the model’s strong ability
to extract discriminative features and leverage expert specialization for clearly separable
traffic patterns. However, certain classes, such as CHAT-GMAIL and STR-YOUTUBE,
show comparatively lower performance, with accuracy values of 76.31% and 77.78%, and
F1-scores of 0.83 and 0.81, respectively. This performance drop may stem from overlapping behavioral characteristics shared with other chat and streaming applications, which
introduce classification ambiguity. Despite this, the model maintains relatively balanced

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

22 of 38

precision and recall values across all classes, reflecting its robustness in handling both false
positives and false negatives.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 9. Precision–recall curve of the proposed ALF-MoE model on (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset,
(b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

Table 4 summarizes the classification performance of the ALF-MoE model on the Unicauca dataset, which features five high-level application categories: Chat, Database, Media,
SocialNetwork, and Web. The model achieves strong performance across all classes, with
accuracy ranging from 93.3% (Web) to 99.4% (SocialNetwork). The associated precision,
recall, and F1-score values consistently exceed 0.96, underscoring the model’s ability to generalize effectively in a coarse-grained classification scenario. The class Chat shows a slightly
lower recall value (0.96), potentially due to misclassifications with similar communicationoriented categories. Nonetheless, the high precision value (0.96) and F1-score (0.96) confirm
that the model minimizes both over-predictions and under-predictions. Notably, the model
achieves perfect precision, recall, and F1-score (1.00) for the SocialNetwork class, indicating
excellent expert specialization for this traffic type.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

23 of 38

Table 3. Per-class performance metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of ISCX VPN non
VPN dataset.

Class

Accuracy (%)

Precision

Recall

F1

100.00
99.05
100.00
100.00
100.00
76.31
100.00
100.00
95.56
100.00
100.00
98.15
93.94
100.00
96.77
77.78
98.85
100.00

0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.98
0.91
0.92
1.00
0.93
0.97
0.97
1.00
0.91
1.00
0.94
0.85
0.99
1.00

1.00
0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.76
1.00
1.00
0.96
1.00
1.00
0.98
0.94
1.00
0.97
0.78
0.99
1.00

0.99
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.83
0.96
1.00
0.95
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.93
1.00
0.95
0.81
0.99
1.00

AUDIO-FACEBOOK
AUDIO-HANGOUTS
AUDIO-SKYPE
AUDIO-VOIPBUSTER
CHAT-FACEBOOK
CHAT-GMAIL
CHAT-HANGOUTS
CHAT-ICQ
EMAIL
FILE-FTPS
FILE-SFTP-DOWN
FILE-SKYPE
STR-NETFLIX
STR-SPOTIFY
STR-VIMEO
STR-YOUTUBE
VIDEO-HANGOUTS
VIDEO-SKYPE

Table 4. Per-class performance metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of Unicauca dataset.

Class
Chat
Database
Media
SocialNetwork
Web

Accuracy (%)

Precision

Recall

F1

95.6
99.3
97.9
99.4
93.3

0.96
0.97
0.97
1.00
1.00

0.96
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.93

0.96
0.98
0.98
1.00
0.97

Table 5 reports the per-class performance of the proposed ALF-MoE model on the UNSWIoTraffic dataset, which contains IoT device-level classes. The model shows consistently strong
results across all devices, with the class-wise accuracy ranging from 91.86% (CanaryCamera)
to 100.00% (LiFXBulb). Most classes achieve an accuracy above 96%, indicating the reliable
discrimination of device-specific traffic patterns. In terms of precision, recall, and F1-score,
the model maintains high values for the majority of devices, confirming balanced detection
performance. LiFXBulb achieves perfect precision, recall, and F1-score (1.00), demonstrating
clear separability for this device’s traffic. AugustDoorBell also shows near-ideal performance
with a precision value of 1.00, a recall value of 0.99, and an F1-score of 0.99. The lowestperforming class is CanaryCamera, with a precision value of 0.93, recall of 0.91, and F1-score
of 0.92, due to traffic similarity with other smart home devices that share common protocols
and background communication behaviors. SamsungSmartThings shows a comparatively
lower precision value (0.84) and F1-score (0.89), suggesting occasional false positives, but its
recall remains high (0.94), indicating that most true samples are still correctly identified.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

24 of 38

Table 5. Per-class performance metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of UNSWIoTraffic dataset.

Class

Accuracy (%)

Precision

Recall

F1

AmazonEcho

97.089

0.99

0.97

0.98

AugustDoorBell

99.23

1.00

0.99

0.99

AwairAirQuality

99.00

0.99

0.99

0.99

CanaryCamera

91.86

0.93

0.91

0.92

HPPrinter

99.01

0.96

0.99

0.97

LiFXBulb

100.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

SamsungSmartThings

94.68

0.84

0.94

0.89

TPLinkSmartPlug

96.53

1.00

0.96

0.98

4.6. Gating Behavior and Expert Utilization Analysis
Figure 10 provides a detailed comparison of the average gating weights assigned to
each expert module in the proposed ALF-MoE architecture across three datasets: ISCX VPNnonVPN (Figure 10a), Unicauca (Figure 10b), and UNSW-IoTraffic (Figure 10c). The distribution
of weights reflects the relative importance of each expert model (DNN, CNN, GRU, CAE,
and LSTM) as determined by the learned gating mechanism. In the ISCX dataset, the CAE
(frequentist) expert received the highest average weight (0.44), indicating its strong ability
to extract distinguishing features from ISCX traffic flows, likely due to its unsupervised
reconstruction of high-dimensional inputs. The general-purpose DNN expert also played a
significant role (0.22), while LSTM (temporal expert) received the lowest weight, suggesting that
temporal dependencies were less critical for this dataset. Conversely, in the Unicauca dataset,
the CNN (spatial expert) emerged as the dominant contributor (0.40), closely followed by the
general DNN (0.26) and CAE (0.22). This shift in expert importance suggests that local spatial
patterns and hierarchical abstractions, which CNNs are particularly effective at capturing, are
more discriminative in Unicauca’s application-level flow classes. The GRU (sequential) expert
received minimal weight, indicating limited sequential dependencies in the Unicauca feature
space. These observations highlight the adaptive nature of the ALF-MoE gating network,
which dynamically allocates attention based on the dataset’s characteristics, thereby ensuring
optimal expert collaboration tailored to the specific traffic patterns and feature relevance of
each scenario. In UNSW-IoTraffic, the CAE (frequency expert) receives the highest average
weight (0.50), showing that frequency-domain representations provide the most discriminative
cues for separating device-specific behaviors. This is reasonable for IoT traffic, where periodic
signaling, heartbeat messages, and repetitive communication patterns are standard and are
well captured in the spectral domain. The CNN (spatial expert) contributes the second-largest
weight (around 0.25), suggesting that local feature interactions and structured patterns in the
constructed spatial input are also important for device identification. The Dense expert shows
a moderate contribution (0.15), indicating that global flow statistics still support classification
but are not the primary drivers in this dataset. In contrast, the sequential GRU expert and the
temporal LSTM expert receive relatively small weights (0.10), implying that explicit temporal
dependencies in the constructed sequences are less informative than frequency and local spatial
patterns for UNSW-IoTraffic.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

25 of 38

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 10. Average gating weights assigned to each expert across datasets: the (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN
dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

To complement the average gating weights for each expert, Figure 11 visualizes the
sample-wise gating weight distributions for each expert across validation samples. In both
datasets, the gating network dynamically varies the weights per input instance, rather
than assigning static importance to experts. This reflects the architecture’s adaptive nature.
For the ISCX dataset (Figure 11a), a broader spread in expert usage is visible, particularly
for the dense and CAE modules, suggesting that the model frequently switches between
representations depending on traffic type. In the Unicauca dataset (Figure 11b), the CNN
expert shows consistently strong activations across samples, reinforcing its dominant role.
Meanwhile, the statistical expert receives minimal attention in both datasets, suggesting
limited standalone utility but potentially serving a supporting role when combined with
others. For the UNSW-IoTraffic dataset (Figure 11c), the sample-wise gating heatmap
shows clear, input-dependent expert selection across validation samples. The CAE exhibits
the most frequent and strongest activations, with many samples receiving high weights,
which aligns with its dominant average contribution on this dataset. This pattern indicates
that frequency-domain cues are consistently informative for distinguishing IoT device
behaviors, especially when devices generate periodic and repetitive communication traffic.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

26 of 38

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 11. Sample-wise gating weight distributions for each expert on the validation set: (a) ISCX
VPN-nonVPN dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

Figure 12 presents the average gating weights assigned to each expert based on the
predicted class labels in the (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN, (b) Unicauca, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic
datasets. These figures provide critical insight into the specialization behavior of the gating
network in the ALF-MoE model. In the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset (Figure 12a), it is observed that CNN (spatial) and CAE (frequentist) experts dominate across multiple classes,
especially for traffic types with pronounced spatial or frequency-based characteristics,
such as VIDEO-SKYPE, AUDIO-FACEBOOK, and STR-SPOTIFY. Meanwhile, the Dense
(general) and LSTM (temporal) experts exhibit class-specific activations, particularly in
sequential or mixed-type traffic such as FILE-FTP and CHAT-HANGOUTS, suggesting
that the gating mechanism effectively allocates model capacity based on input modality.
Similarly, in the Unicauca dataset (Figure 12b), the gating network shows a distinct allocation pattern, with the CNN (spatial) expert receiving the highest weight for the Database
and Media classes, suggesting a strong spatial dependency in these categories. In contrast,
the Dense (general) expert is more involved in Chat and Web, reflecting their generalized content features. The GRU (statistical) expert shows minimal influence across both

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

27 of 38

datasets, possibly due to redundancy or lower relevance of purely statistical patterns in
these tasks. These findings validate the ALF-MoE model’s selective specialization strategy
and emphasize its adaptability to structural differences across traffic categories, enabling
robust, interpretable multi-expert learning. Moreover, in UNSW-IoTraffic (Figure 12c), this
class-wise breakdown provides deeper insight into how the gating network specializes
expert usage for different device behaviors, rather than relying on a single fixed weighting
strategy. Overall, the CAE (frequency) expert performs best across most device classes,
indicating that frequency-domain cues are highly discriminative for device identification.
In particular, AwairAirQuality, SamsungSmartThings, and TPLinkSmartPlug exhibit a
strong CAE emphasis, suggesting that periodic signaling and repetitive communication
patterns are key characteristics of these devices. However, the gating mechanism also
reveals meaningful class-dependent variations. For AugustDoorBell and HPPrinter, the
CNN (spatial) expert receives a comparatively high weight, indicating that local feature
interactions in the constructed spatial input are particularly informative for these device
traffic profiles. The Dense (general) expert makes a notable contribution to Amazon Echo,
demonstrating the usefulness of global flow-level statistics for voice-assistant traffic. Interestingly, LiFXBulb shows firm reliance on the GRU (statistical) expert, suggesting that
its constructed statistical representation contains distinctive patterns that the gating network exploits. The LSTM (temporal) expert remains consistently low across all classes,
suggesting that long-range temporal dependencies, as modeled by the LSTM input format,
contribute less to the UNSW-IoTraffic device classification task.
Figure 13 illustrates the distribution of gating weights assigned to individual experts
by the gating network based on prediction correctness across various datasets: the (a) ISCX
VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic datasets. Each boxplot shows the degree of
reliance the gating mechanism places on a particular expert when the final prediction is
correct (label 1) versus incorrect (label 0). This analysis offers valuable insight into how
different experts contribute to accurate vs. faulty decisions, highlighting the adaptive
specialization mechanism of the ALF-MoE model. In the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset
(Figure 13a), the CAE (frequency-based) expert is most prominently favored in correct
predictions, often receiving the highest weights when the model succeeds. The dense
expert also maintains moderately strong weights for correct classifications. In contrast,
the CNN and GRU experts are more evenly distributed across both correct and incorrect
classifications, indicating greater generalizability. Moreover, LSTM contributes relatively
low weights overall, suggesting that temporal dependencies are less critical for this dataset.
A clear shift in weight distribution for the CAE expert between correct and incorrect
predictions supports the claim that gating emphasizes specialized experts more when
confident decisions are made. For the Unicauca dataset (Figure 13b), the CNN expert
dominates the correct classifications, consistently receiving the highest weights. This
suggests that local spatial patterns are highly informative for traffic classes in this dataset.
The dense and GRU experts show a more balanced contribution across both correct and
incorrect predictions. The LSTM and CAE experts again appear to play a lesser role in
accurate classification for this dataset. The relatively wider interquartile range for incorrect
predictions suggests increased uncertainty in expert selection, reinforcing the benefit of the
gating mechanism’s adaptivity to input-level patterns. As a result, the plots demonstrate
that ALF-MoE not only balances expert contributions but also selectively amplifies the most
informative expert based on the input context, leading to better generalization ability and
reduced reliance on any single model. These dynamics affirm the benefit of incorporating
an interpretable gating structure in expert-based ensemble architectures. For the UNSWIoTraffic dataset (Figure 13c), the CAE expert receives the largest weights overall, and
its median weight is notably higher for correct predictions than for incorrect predictions.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

28 of 38

This indicates that the model is more likely to succeed when the gating network strongly
emphasizes frequency-domain representations, which aligns with the periodic and protocoldriven nature of IoT device communications. The wider spread of CAE weights in incorrect
cases suggests that misclassifications often occur when the gating distribution becomes less
decisive or when frequency cues are less distinctive. The Dense expert shows relatively
small median weights, but correct predictions exhibit a slightly higher, more variable
distribution than incorrect ones, suggesting that global flow statistics provide supportive
information in specific IoT samples. The CNN expert also shows higher weights for correct
predictions than for incorrect ones, suggesting that local feature interactions contribute to
accurate recognition in a subset of devices. In contrast, the GRU and LSTM experts maintain
low weights for both correct and incorrect predictions, indicating that the constructed
sequential and long-range temporal representations play a limited role in the UNSWIoTraffic dataset.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 12. Average gating weights assigned to each expert for different predicted classes across
datasets: (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

29 of 38

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 13. Gating weight distributions for each expert based on prediction correctness: (a) ISCX
VPN-nonVPN dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset. These plots contrast
expert weights between correctly and incorrectly classified samples.

Figure 14 visualizes the relationship between the gating weights and the softmax
confidence across all experts for the ISCX VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic
datasets. The majority of highly confident predictions (con f idence > 0.9) are associated
with higher gating weights, especially for specialized experts such as the CAE and CNN
modules. This indicates that when the model is more certain about its predictions, it
tends to assign more responsibility to the most relevant experts, reflecting an effective
expert specialization mechanism. Conversely, samples with lower confidence show more
dispersed gating weights, suggesting that the model draws on a broader mix of experts
when it is uncertain, highlighting its adaptive nature.
Figure 15 shows the relationship between gating weights and the corresponding
categorical cross-entropy loss. Experts with lower gating weights (e.g., GRU and LSTM)
often align with higher loss values, indicating that their contributions are less optimal for
many samples. Meanwhile, dominant experts such as CAE (in ISCX and UNSW-IoTraffic)
and CNN (in Unicauca) not only receive higher weights but also correspond to lower loss
regions, underscoring their discriminative strength.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

30 of 38

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 14. Gating weights vs. softmax confidence for all experts on the (a) ISCX VPN-nonVPN
dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

The performance of the proposed ALF-MoE traffic classification framework is compared with other state-of-the-art approaches, as summarized in Tables 6–8. On the ISCX
VPN-nonVPN dataset, the proposed model attained an accuracy of 98.43%, outperforming
the competitive techniques reported in [32–34,37,38]. These results validate the robustness and effectiveness of the ALF-MoE architecture in handling diverse traffic patterns,
including encrypted and non-encrypted flows. Similarly, on the Unicauca dataset, ALFMoE was benchmarked against several state-of-the-art models [27–30], and demonstrated
superior performance, achieving an impressive accuracy of 98.96%. Moreover, on the
UNSW-IoTraffic dataset, we benchmarked ALF-MoE against several baseline models [47,54].
ALF-MoE achieved the best performance, reaching an accuracy of 97.93%.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

31 of 38

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 15. Gating weights vs. categorical cross-entropy loss for all experts on the (a) ISCX VPNnonVPN dataset, (b) Unicauca dataset, and (c) UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.
Table 6. Performance comparison of recent models using the ISCX VPN-non VPN dataset.

Ref.

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

[38]

96.8

95.84

94.75

95.52

[33]

97.02

98

97.5

97

[34]

97.49

95.67

94.84

94.78

[32]

97.9

97.89

97.89

97.8

[37]

97.186

97.919

97.560

97.733

[48]

-

92.86

95.30

94

[50]

80.25

80.01

-

79.65

[51]

76.79

83.06

83.77

83.32

proposed

98.43

98.06

97.98

97.91

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

32 of 38

Table 7. Performance comparison of recent models using the Unicauca dataset.

Paper

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

[29]

91.77

–

–

–

[30]

89.42

87.34

88.92

88.12

[27]

92.13

91.67

91.28

91.45

[28]

88.67

85.92

87.40

86.65

Proposed

98.96

97.15

98

98.06

Table 8. Performance comparison of recent models using the UNSW-IoTraffic dataset.

Ref.

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

[47]

70.00

-

-

-

[54]

96.30

99.08

97.36

97.89

Proposed

97.93

98.03

97.85

97.19

4.7. Complexity Analysis
The training parameters and computational complexity of the proposed ALF-MoE
model are summarized in Table 9. The results show that ALF-MoE remains lightweight,
requiring only 90,413 trainable parameters with a compact model size of 1.230 MB.
Across all datasets, the inference latency stays in the range of 1.49–2.21 ms per sample,
enabling real-time traffic classification with high throughput (452–670 samples/s). The
testing time is also small, confirming that the model can process flow samples efficiently
during deployment.
Table 9. Complexity metrics of ALF-MoE on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSWIoTraffic datasets.

ISCX VPN-NonVPN

Unicauca

UNSW-IoTraffic

Training time (s)

87.52

79.71

87.23

Testing time (s)

1.55

0.30

1.37

Latency (ms/sample)

2.2115

1.4919

1.6817

Throughput (samples/s)

452.19

670.27

594.65

Energy per inference (J)

99.5175

67.1355

75.6765

Total parameters (ALF-MoE)

90,413

Model size (ALF-MoE)

1.230 MB

4.8. Model Stability Analysis
Table 10 shows the ten-fold cross-validation stability analysis of ALF-MoE for ISCX
VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic. Across all folds, ALF-MoE consistently
achieves a high accuracy and macro-F1. A slight fold-to-fold variance shows low sensitivity
to the train–test partition. The performance patterns across datasets remain consistent, and
no single fold dominates the overall results, indicating that the reported gains are not due
to a favorable split.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

33 of 38

Table 10. Model stability analysis using ten-fold cross-validation on ISCX VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca,
and UNSW-IoTraffic.

ISCX VPN-Non VPN

Unicauca

UNSW-IoTraffic

Accuracy

Macro F1

Accuracy

Macro F1

Accuracy

Macro F1

Fold 1

98.05

91.52

98.67

94.83

97.86

95.38

Fold 2

99.89

93.40

98.23

95.65

96.61

95.11

Fold 3

99.77

93.47

97.03

97.29

97.65

96.77

Fold 4

99.77

92.56

97.86

95.59

96.86

95.28

Fold 5

98.26

92.38

99.91

91.06

98.91

97.81

Fold 6

98.19

93.69

98.44

95.92

98.86

95.26

Fold 7

97.03

85.54

97.28

93.87

96.40

94.42

Fold 8

98.61

93.33

98.46

96.68

96.61

93.71

Fold 9

98.89

89.36

98.49

95.23

96.40

91.50

Fold 10

98.21

93.30

99.01

92.65

97.44

95.26

Macro F1

91.86

94.88

95.05

4.9. Ablation Study
The ablation study assesses the impact of individual components in the proposed
ALF-MoE model by selectively disabling key modules and testing single expert variants.
On the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset, the complete ALF-MoE model achieves the highest
accuracy of 98.43%. In contrast, removing the gating network reduces the accuracy to
95.82%, underscoring the critical role of the gating network in adaptive expert selection.
Similarly, replacing the ensemble approach with individual expert models such as CNN,
GRU, CAE, and LSTM results in decreased performance, with accuracies ranging from
94.02% to 97.85%. The Dense network alone achieves an accuracy of 95.25%, indicating
that no single expert can match the capabilities of the ensemble. Comparable trends
are observed in the Unicauca dataset, where the complete model reaches an accuracy of
98.96%, while models without the gating module or those that utilize only a single expert
achieve lower accuracies, ranging from 95.13% to 98.06%. On the UNSW-IoTraffic dataset,
the complete ALF-MoE model achieves the best accuracy of 97.93%, confirming that the
complete multi-expert fusion strategy is the most effective for traffic classification. When
the gating network is removed, the accuracy drops to 96.91%, highlighting that adaptive
expert weighting still provides a measurable benefit even in this device-centric setting.
The single expert variants show larger performance degradation, with accuracies ranging
from 91.11% (LSTM only) to 96.82% (CAE only), indicating that relying on one feature
domain is insufficient to capture diverse IoT traffic behaviors. These results confirm
the effectiveness of the multi-expert ensemble architecture and the gating network in
enhancing classification performance. A detailed summary of the results can be found in
Table 11.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

34 of 38

Table 11. Ablation study accuracy (%) on three datasets.

Method
Proposed ALF-MoE Model
Without Gating Network
Dense Network Only
CNN Network Only
GRU Network Only
CAE Network Only
LSTM Network Only

ISCX VPN-NonVPN

Unicauca

UNSW-IoTraffic

98.43
95.82
95.25
97.18
94.81
97.85
94.02

98.96
96.63
96.84
98.06
95.13
97.39
95.77

97.93
96.91
94.54
95.48
93.11
96.82
91.11

5. Discussion
The proposed ALF-MoE model achieves strong and consistent traffic classification performance across the ISCX VPN-nonVPN, Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic datasets, with accuracies of 98.43%, 98.96%, and 97.93%, respectively. This demonstrates that the framework
generalizes across heterogeneous traffic scenarios, including encrypted and unencrypted
flows. Beyond accuracy, the learned expert specializations provide an interpretable view of
which feature domains are most informative for a given dataset and class. In particular, the
modular design enables the model to capture complementary traffic characteristics, while
the gating mechanism adaptively emphasizes the most relevant experts per sample. The
additional ALF fusion stage further refines the weighted expert outputs via a non-linear
transformation, thereby improving decision boundaries and stabilizing ensemble learning.
Compared with conventional single-backbone deep classifiers and standard ensemble
learning, ALF-MoE explicitly decomposes feature learning into domain-specific experts. It
then learns data-dependent expert weights through a gating network. This formulation
aligns with the broader Mixture of Experts paradigm. However, it differs in two key aspects:
(i) the experts are intentionally designed to capture distinct traffic feature modalities rather
than being homogeneous subnetworks, and (ii) the final decision aggregation is not a
simple weighted sum of logits, but is refined via a learnable fusion module with a nonlinear mapping. Empirically, the ablation results confirm that both the gating and fusion
strategies contribute to the final performance. This indicates that the gains are not solely
due to model capacity but to selective specialization and adaptive combination.
The proposed model is lightweight and suitable for deployment on IoT edge and
gateway platforms. The complexity analysis reports the total parameters, model size,
latency, throughput, and estimated energy per inference. ALF-MoE is compact in memory
(90,413 parameters; 1.230 MB), but multi-expert inference incurs additional computational
cost compared with a single backbone. The measured inference latency is 1.49–2.21 ms per
sample, and the throughput is 452–670 samples/s. These results indicate that ALF-MoE
can support real-time flow-level classification under typical gateway workloads. The most
practical deployment point is an IoT gateway or edge node (a home or industrial gateway,
a hospital edge server, or a vehicular edge unit), where traffic is aggregated, and resources
are less constrained. Direct deployment on ultra-low-power IoT devices would still be
complex without further optimization.
Although ALF-MoE achieves strong accuracy, it has several practical limitations. The
multi-expert design introduces extra computation compared with a single backbone, even
though the overall model size is compact. As a result, the most realistic deployment is on
an IoT gateway or edge server rather than ultra-low-power end devices, unless further
optimization is applied. Despite near-perfect accuracy for many classes, the model shows
performance degradation in overlapping traffic categories. These errors are likely caused
by behavioral similarity and protocol overlap across classes. Common ports, payload size
patterns, and encryption behaviors can make classes hard to separate. This can lead to

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

35 of 38

confusion even among expert models. Robustness under real-world noise and adversarial
traffic shaping is another constraint. We did not fully evaluate scenarios such as packet
loss, jitter, or evasion attacks. Cross-dataset generalization and long-term concept drift are
also important constraints.
Future work will improve the deployability, robustness, and generalization of ALFMoE in resource-constrained environments. A key direction is reducing multi-expert
overhead by using sparse or top-k expert activation. Additional efficiency gains can be
achieved through pruning, quantization, and knowledge distillation to support gateway
and edge deployments. Another research path is cross-dataset training and testing to
assess generalization under different traffic sources. Long-term evaluation is also needed to
study distribution shift and concept drift in streaming IoT traffic. To mitigate overlapping
classes, class-balanced or focal loss functions can be explored. Metric-learning objectives
and feature augmentation offer further opportunities to improve separation for minority
and challenging classes.

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose ALF-MoE, a traffic classification framework for IoT networks
that improves QoS, security, and resource management. The proposed model addresses
the challenge of learning diverse, complementary representations from heterogeneous IoT
traffic by adopting a Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture. Specifically, we integrated five
specialized expert networks, each targeting a distinct feature category: a Dense Neural
Network for general statistical features, a CNN for spatial patterns, a GRU-based model for
statistical variations, a CAE for frequency-domain representations, and an LSTM for temporal dependencies. To generate the final decision, we combined a dynamic gating mechanism
with an Attention-based Learnable Fusion (ALF) module to adaptively aggregate expert
outputs in a context-aware manner.
The experimental results on three public benchmark datasets, ISCX VPN-nonVPN,
Unicauca, and UNSW-IoTraffic, showed that ALF-MoE achieves accuracies of 98.43%,
98.96%, and 97.93%, respectively. The results further demonstrated that ALF-MoE consistently outperforms baseline methods and recent state-of-the-art approaches in terms
of its accuracy and F1-score, confirming its effectiveness and reliability across diverse
traffic scenarios.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.C.; data curation, J.C.; funding acquisition, D.D.;
investigation, D.D.; methodology, J.C.; project administration, G.S.; resources, G.S.; software,
J.C.; supervision, G.S. and D.D.; validation, D.D.; d, D.D.; writing—original draft, J.C.; and
writing—review and editing, G.S. and D.D. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The datasets analyzed in this study are publicly available from the
following sources: (i) the ISCX VPN-non VPN dataset: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/vpn.html
(accessed on 24 October 2025); (ii) the Unicauca dataset: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jsrojas/
labeled-network-traffic-flows-114-applications (accessed on 24 October 2025); and (iii) the UNSWIoTraffic dataset: https://datadryad.org/ (accessed on 10 January 2026).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.
2.

GSMA Intelligence. IoT Connections Forecast to 2030. Available online: https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/iotconnections-forecast-to-2030 (accessed on 7 January 2026).
IoT Analytics. How Many IoT Devices Are There in 2025? Available online: https://iot-analytics.com/number-connected-iotdevices/ (accessed on 7 January 2026).

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

36 of 38

Younas, M.I.; Iqbal, M.J.; Aziz, A.; Sodhro, A.H. Toward QoS Monitoring in IoT Edge Devices Driven Healthcare—A Systematic
Literature Review. Sensors 2023, 23, 8885. [CrossRef]
Iqbal, A.; Khurshaid, T.; Nauman, A.; Rhee, S.-B. Energy-Aware Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communication for Healthcare IoT
in Beyond 5G and 6G Networks. Sensors 2025, 25, 3474. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Peroni, L.; Gorinsky, S. An End-to-End Pipeline Perspective on Video Streaming in Best-Effort Networks: A Survey and Tutorial.
ACM Comput. Surv. 2025, 57, 322. [CrossRef]
Bouraqia, K.; Sabir, E.; Sadik, M.; Ladid, L. Quality of Experience for Streaming Services: Measurements, Challenges and Insights.
IEEE Access 2020, 8, 13341–13361. [CrossRef]
Azab, A.; Khasawneh, M.; Alrabaee, S.; Choo, K.-K.R.; Sarsour, M. Network traffic classification: Techniques, datasets, and
challenges. Digit. Commun. Netw. 2024, 10, 676–692. [CrossRef]
Nguyen, T.T.T.; Armitage, G. A Survey of techniques for internet traffic classification using machine learning. IEEE Commun.
Surv. Tutor. 2008, 10, 56–76. [CrossRef]
Wang, P.; Chen, X.; Ye, F.; Sun, Z. A survey of techniques for mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning.
IEEE Access 2019, 7, 54024–54033. [CrossRef]
Shi, H.; Li, H.; Zhang, D.; Cheng, C.; Cao, X. An efficient feature generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection
techniques for traffic classification. Comput. Netw. 2018, 132, 81–98. [CrossRef]
Kaur, G.; Sharma, A. A Deep learning-based model using hybrid feature extraction approach for consumer sentiment analysis.
J. Big Data 2023, 10, 5. [CrossRef]
Li, Y.; Hassanzadeh, T.; Shamonin, D.P.; Reijnierse, M.; van der Helm-van Mil, A.H.M.; Stoel, B.C. Integrated feature analysis for
deep learning interpretation and class activation maps. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2407.01142. [CrossRef]
Seydali, M.; Khunjush, F.; Akbari, B.; Dogani, J. CBS: A deep learning approach for encrypted traffic classification with mixed
spatio-temporal and statistical features. IEEE Access 2023, 11, 141674–141702. [CrossRef]
Wang, C.; Zhang, W.; Hao, H.; Shi, H. Network traffic classification model based on spatio-temporal feature extraction. Electronics
2024, 13, 1236. [CrossRef]
Huang, S.; Chen, K.; Liu, C.; Liang, A.; Guan, H. A statistical-feature-based approach to internet traffic classification using
machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on Ultra Modern Telecommunications & Workshops
(ICUMT), St. Petersburg, Russia, 12–14 October 2009; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
Marnerides, A.K.; Pezaros, D.P.; Kim, H.-C.; Hutchison, D. Internet traffic classification using energy time-frequency distributions.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Budapest, Hungary, 9–13 June
Jisi, C.; Roh, B.-H.; Ali, J. An effective scheme for classifying imbalanced traffic in SD-IoT, leveraging XGBoost and active learning.
Comput. Netw. 2025, 257, 110939. [CrossRef]
Aouedi, O.; Piamrat, K.; Parrein, B. Ensemble-based deep learning model for network traffic classification. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv.
Manag. 2022, 19, 4124–4135. [CrossRef]
Supriyadi, M.R.; Samah, A.B.A.; Muliadi, J.; Awang, R.A.R.; Ismail, N.H.; Majid, H.A.; Othman, M.S.B.; Hashim, S.Z.B.M. A
systematic literature review: Exploring the challenges of ensemble model for medical imaging. BMC Med. Imaging 2025, 25, 128.
[CrossRef]
Kaur, I.; Kaur, A. A Novel Four-Way Approach Designed with Ensemble Feature Selection for Code Smell Detection. IEEE Access
2021, 9, 8695–8707. [CrossRef]
Ganaie, M.A.; Hu, M.; Malik, A.K.; Tanveer, M.; Suganthan, P.N. Ensemble deep learning: A review. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2022,
115, 105151. [CrossRef]
Cunningham, P.; Carney, J. Diversity versus quality in classification ensembles based on feature selection. In Machine Learning:
ECML 2000; López de Mántaras, R., Plaza, E., Eds.; Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2000; Volume 1810. [CrossRef]
Mu, S.; Lin, S. A Comprehensive Survey of Mixture-of-Experts: Algorithms, Theory, and Applications. arXiv 2025,
arXiv:2503.07137. [CrossRef]
Chowdhury, A.; Raut, S.A. A survey study on Internet of Things resource management. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2018, 120, 42–60.
[CrossRef]
Deng, Z.; Ma, W.; Han, Q.L.; Zhou, W.; Zhu, X.; Wen, S.; Xiang, Y. Exploring DeepSeek: A Survey on Advances, Applications,
Challenges and Future Directions. IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin. 2025, 12, 872–893. [CrossRef]
Sheng, C.; Zhou, W.; Han, Q.L.; Ma, W.; Zhu, X.; Wen, S.; Xiang, Y. Network Traffic Fingerprinting for IIoT Device Identification:
A Survey. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2025, 21, 3541–3554. [CrossRef]
Serag, R.H.; Abdalzaher, M.S.; Abd El Atty Elsayed, H.; Sobh, M.; Krichen, M.; Salim, M.M. Machine-learning-based traffic
classification in software-defined networks. Electronics 2024, 13, 1108. [CrossRef]
El-serwy, A.A.; AbdElhalim, E.; Mohamed, M.A. Network slicing based on real-time traffic classification in software defined
network (SDN) using machine learning. Mansoura Eng. J. 2022, 47, 9. [CrossRef]

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

37 of 38

Alash, Y.; Altuma, R.; Al-Jobouri, L. Implementing packet-level internet traffic classification using XGBoost in software-defined
networking. Int. J. Intell. Eng. Syst. 2025, 18, 283–300. [CrossRef]
Omanga, M.J.; Hambali Moshood, A.; Bethel, N.U.; Bulus, K. An ensemble model for smart user consumption analysis on
over-the-top applications. Sule Lamido Univ. J. Sci. Technol. 2024, 8, 112–124.
Agrafiotis, G.; Makri, E.; Flionis, I.; Lalas, A.; Votis, K.; Tzovaras, D. Image-based neural network models for malware traffic
classification using PCAP to picture conversion. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Availability, Reliability
and Security (ARES), Vienna, Austria, 23–26 August 2022; p. 59. [CrossRef]
Liu, Y.; Wang, X.; Qu, B.; Zhao, F. ATVITSC: A novel encrypted traffic classification method based on deep learning. IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Secur. 2024, 19, 9374–9389. [CrossRef]
Zhao, R.; Zhan, M.; Deng, X.; Li, F.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Gui, G.; Xue, Z. A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
autoencoder for traffic classification. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 2024, 32, 2012–2025. [CrossRef]
Xu, K.; Zhang, X.; Wang, Y.; Ohtsuki, T.; Adebisi, B.; Sari, H.; Gui, G. Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification based
on masked autoencoder. IEEE Internet Things J. 2024, 11, 17330–17340. [CrossRef]
Li, Z.; Jin, Y. EncryptoVision: A dual-modal fusion-based multi-classification model for encrypted traffic recognition. Comput.
Netw. 2025, 270, 111499. [CrossRef]
Zhan, M.; Yang, J.; Jia, D.; Fu, G. EAPT: An encrypted traffic classification model via adversarial pre-trained transformers. Comput.
Netw. 2025, 257, 110973. [CrossRef]
Li, Z.; Xu, X. L2-BiTCN-CNN: Spatio-temporal features fusion-based multi-classification model for various internet applications
identification. Comput. Netw. 2024, 243, 110298. [CrossRef]
Yang, W.; Tang, C.; Tang, C.; Lu, J.; Si, J.; Zeng, Z.; Ma, W. Traffic through two lenses: A dual-branch vision transformer for IoT
traffic classification. Comput. Netw. 2025, 269, 111469. [CrossRef]
Xu, S.-J.; Kong, K.-C.; Jin, X.-B.; Geng, G.-G. Unveiling traffic paths: Explainable path signature feature-based encrypted traffic
classification. Comput. Secur. 2025, 150, 104283. [CrossRef]
Ding, R.; Sun, L.; Ding, Z.; Zang, W.; Dai, L. Towards targeted and universal adversarial attacks against network traffic
classification. Comput. Secur. 2025, 155, 104470. [CrossRef]
Kim, M.-G.; Kim, H. Ensemble encoder-based attack traffic classification for secure 5G slicing networks. CMES–Comput. Model.
Eng. Sci. 2025, 143, 2391–2415. [CrossRef]
Al-Shurbaji, T.; Anbar, M.; Manickam, S.; Al-Amiedy, T.A.; AL Mukhaini, G.; Hashim, H.; Farsi, M.; Atlam, E.-S. BoT-EnsIDS:
Approach for detecting IoT botnet attacks leveraging bio-inspired based ensemble feature selection and hybrid deep learning
model. Alexandria Eng. J. 2025, 129, 744–767. [CrossRef]
Wu, Y.; Liu, L.; Yu, Y.; Chen, G.; Hu, J. Online ensemble learning-based anomaly detection for IoT systems. Appl. Soft Comput.
2025, 173, 112931. [CrossRef]
Jacobs, R.A.; Jordan, M.I.; Nowlan, S.J.; Hinton, G.E. Adaptive Mixtures of Local Experts. Neural Comput. 1991, 3, 79–87. [CrossRef]
Jordan, M.I.; Jacobs, R.A. Hierarchical Mixtures of Experts and the EM Algorithm. Neural Comput. 1994, 6, 181–214. [CrossRef]
Shazeer, N.; Mirhoseini, A.; Maziarz, K.; Davis, A.; Le, Q.; Hinton, G.; Dean, J. Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The
Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1701.06538.
Jisi, C.; Roh, B.-H.; Ali, J.; Khalid, M.; Mohsin, A.R. Deep learning-based mixture-of-experts model for enhanced network traffic
classification. In Proceedings of the 2025 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), Chiang Mai, Thailand,
15–17 January 2025; pp. 175–178. [CrossRef]
Chen, Y.; Li, R.; Zhao, Z.; Zhang, H. MERLOT: A Distilled LLM-Based Mixture-of-Experts Framework for Scalable Encrypted
Traffic Classification. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2411.13004.
Cai, S.; Chen, L.; Chen, J.; Wang, S.; Zhang, G. CL-ViME: Contrastive Learning and Vision Mixture of Experts for Encrypted
Traffic Classification. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 2026, 23, 1422–1434. [CrossRef]
Qin, T.; Cheng, G.; Zhou, Y.; Chen, Z.; Luan, X. SNAKE: A Sustainable and Multi-Functional Traffic Analysis System Utilizing
Specialized Large-Scale Models with a Mixture of Experts Architecture. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2503.13808.
Zhou, J.; Sun, C.; Shen, M.; Yu, S.; Xuan, Q. Traffic-MoE: A Sparse Foundation Model for Network Traffic Analysis. arXiv 2026,
arXiv:2601.00357.
Draper-Gil, G.; Lashkari, A.H.; Mamun, M.S.I.; Ghorbani, A.A. Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP), Rome, Italy,
19–21 February 2016; pp. 407–414. [CrossRef]

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

Mathematics 2026, 14, 525

53.
54.

38 of 38

Rojas, J.S.; Pekar, A.; Rendón, Á.; Corrales, J.C. Smart user consumption profiling: Incremental learning-based OTT service
degradation. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 207426–207442. [CrossRef]
Wannigama, S.; Sivanathan, A.; Gharakheili, H.H. Descriptor: UNSW IoT Traffic Data with Packets, Flows, and Protocols
(UNSW-IoTraffic). IEEE Data Descr. 2025, 2, 311–323. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

https://doi.org/10.3390/math14030525

