An Improved CNN-LSTM Based Intrusion
Detection System for IoT Networks
Mohammad Tariq Ikhlas, Pohanyar Khowaja Khil, Malik Muhammad Mueed Aslam, Dr. Muhammad Khuram Shahzad

arXiv:2606.05776v1 [cs.CR] 4 Jun 2026

SEECS
NUST, Pakistan
Emails: mikhlas.mscs25seecs@seecs.edu.pk, pkhailmscs25seecs@seecs.edu.pk, maslam.mscs25seecs@seecs.edu.pk

Abstract—Abstract—With the rapid proliferation of IoT devices, security concerns have dramatically escalated and intrusion
detection systems are critical. In order to improve detection
performance, we provide an improved CNN-LSTM based intrusion detection model in this work that combines multiclass classification, dataset integration, and temporal feature
learning. Using network traffic data, we evaluate the model
in this study and discover that its accuracy is around 97%.
Experimental results show that the proposed strategy effectively
detects different types of attacks while maintaining consistent performance during training and validation. The source
code for this implementation is publicly available on GitHub
at: https://github.com/mikhlasmscs25seecs-ship-it/IoT-IntrusionDetection-CNN-LSTM.git.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Since the number of IoT devices has increased dramatically
in recent years, network security has proven to be a major
problem. IoT devices are more susceptible to cyberattacks
like DDoS and DoS as they constantly produce network
traffic. Recent studies have highlighted significant security and
communication challenges in IoT environments [10], [12].
Large-scale and complicated data can be difficult for traditional intrusion detection systems to process. Intrusion detection has made extensive use of deep learning techniques,
particularly CNN-based models. [4].
The CNN-based intrusion detection model presented in
[1]. The initial study concentrated on applying deep learning
techniques to secure medical IoT equipment.
However, based on our observations, a lot of current models
do not make the most of the temporal information found in
network traffic. In this study, we add several improvements to
a CNN-based model, including multi-class classification and
LSTM integration. Large-scale IoT traffic data was difficult to
handle during our early studies, which inspired us to refine
the model.
A. Problem Statement
Although deep learning-based intrusion detection has made
progress, certain challenges remain. Many existing techniques
are limited to binary classification, which is insufficient for
IoT systems in the real world where there are numerous attack
types.
Additionally, because CNN-based models mainly focus on
spatial feature extraction, they often fail to capture temporal

correlations in network data, which is insufficient for IoT
systems in the real world where there are various types of
attacks. [7].
Additionally, identification is made more difficult by similarities between benign and some assault kinds, such reconnaissance. Recent works on IoT security and system complexity emphasize these challenges [11]. These limitations suggest
the need for a more robust and flexible model.
B. Contributions
We summarize the main contributions of this work as
follows:
• We proposed a hybrid CNN-LSTM model for IoT networks to improve intrusion detection by capturing both
temporal and geographical patterns.
• We extended the model to handle many assault types
rather than restricting the task as binary classification,
which is more appropriate for real world situations.
• To enhance the generalization, we merged data from
multiple sources, thus the model could learn a wider
spectrum of traffic patterns.
• We cleaned the dataset using a set of preprocessing
techniques to ensure that the input data was consistent
and reliable for training.
• Several metrics were used to evaluate the model to
provide a complete understanding of the model’s performance.
II. S TRUCTURE / O RGANIZATION
The paper is organized in this manner. Section II contains
the literature review. The method is described in Section III.
Section IV displays the results. Section V discusses future
work. Section VI concludes the paper.
III. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
This is the format of the paper. Section II contains the
literature review. The method is described in Section III.
Section IV displays the results. Section V discusses future
work. Section VI concludes the paper. [4].
However, most existing approaches focus on binary classification, which limits their applicability. Another disadvantage
of CNN models is that they ignore temporal dependencies in
network traffic.

Fig. 1. Overview of IoT intrusion detection using a CNN-LSTM model, illustrating IoT environment, data flow, attack types, and detection process.

To address these issues, hybrid models that include CNN
and LSTM have been proposed. [3]. By collecting both
temporal and geographical information, these models improve
detection performance.
Numerous recent studies have examined deep learning for
intrusion detection in IoT environments. In addition, the
integration of IoT with large-scale data analytics introduces
new challenges and opportunities in terms of security and
performance [11].
For example, CNN-based models are often used for feature extraction since they can handle high-dimensional data.
Similarly, LSTM models have been used to capture temporal
dependencies in network traffic.
[3]. However, many existing approaches either focus only
on spatial features or are limited to binary categorization. For
this reason, a hybrid CNN-LSTM model is used in this work.
A CNN-based methodology for identifying [1] hazards in
medical IoT contexts was suggested in a pertinent study. The
program performed exceptionally well in identifying malicious
messages using deep learning.
However, the approach was largely limited to CNN-based
feature extraction and did not fully utilize temporal correlations observed in network data. Additionally, the classification
breadth was limited in comparison to real-world scenarios.

Recent advances in deep learning lead to more advanced
architectures, e.g., attention-based models and transformer
networks. These models have shown promising results in many
sequence modeling tasks and have the potential to be applied
to intrusion detection systems.
However, these models often require large amounts of
computation, which limits their applicability in resourceconstrained IoT environments. Therefore, hybrid methods such
as CNN-LSTM present a good trade-off between performance
and computational efficiency.
Recent studies have explored the integration of IoT with
big data analytics to improve system efficiency and security
[11]. These approaches combine multiple models to improve
detection accuracy and robustness.
However, such methods often introduce additional complexity and computational overhead. In contrast, the proposed
CNN-LSTM model provides a balanced solution by integrating
spatial and temporal learning while maintaining computational
efficiency.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Data Preprocessing
In this study, we expand the CNN-based approach put forth
in [1] by making a number of enhancements. These include

mixing several datasets for improved generalization, adding
an LSTM layer to capture temporal patterns, expanding the
model to multi-class classification, and running a simple realtime simulation.
Missing and incorrect values were eliminated from the
dataset. Additionally, infinite values were handled correctly.
The data was normalized using feature scaling. Feature scaling
ensures that all features contribute equally during training and
prevents some characteristics from dominating others due to
larger numerical ranges. This improves the overall stability
and rate of convergence of the model.
B. Dataset Integration
Multiple CSV files were combined into a single dataset to
improve diversity and generalization.
C. Model Improvement
Because CNN models function well with structured network
traffic data, we employed them for feature extraction. The
data’s temporal dependencies were captured by adding an
LSTM layer.
The CNN layers gather spatial information from network
traffic data, including statistical correlations between variables
and packet flow patterns. These extracted features are then
passed to the LSTM layer.
Because the LSTM layer looks at the features one after the
other, the model can capture temporal relationships present
in network data. This is highly useful for intrusion detection
because attack patterns might change over time.
The combination of CNN and LSTM allows the model to
learn both temporal and spatial characteristics of the data. This
hybrid approach improves the model’s ability to recognize
complex and dynamic attack patterns when compared to CNN
alone.
D. Multi-Class Classification
In order to detect Benign, DDoS, DoS, and Recon assaults,
the model was expanded from binary classification to multiclass classification.
E. Real-Time Simulation
The trained model was given a sample input to mimic realtime prediction.
F. Algorithm: CNN-LSTM Training Procedure
To identify sequential patterns in the data, we added an
LSTM layer. According to what we understand, LSTM aids
in the learning of temporal connections, whereas CNN extracts
features.
By processing the output sequence and learning temporal
dependencies, LSTM enhances the model’s capacity to identify
intricate assault patterns, in contrast to CNN, which concentrates on spatial feature extraction.
Recent research has examined this hybrid technique, which
blends temporal and spatial learning. [3].

Algorithm 1 CNN-LSTM Training for IoT Intrusion Detection
1: Input: Raw IoT network traffic dataset
2: Output: Trained CNN-LSTM model
3: Import required libraries (NumPy, Pandas, PyTorch)
4: Set random seed for reproducibility
5: Load dataset from CSV files
6: Combine multiple datasets into one
7: Data Preprocessing:
8: Remove missing values
9: Handle infinite values
10: Normalize features using MinMaxScaler
11: Encode labels for multi-class classification
12: Split dataset into training and testing sets
13: Define CNN layers for feature extraction
14: Apply MaxPooling for dimensionality reduction
15: Replace Flatten layer with LSTM
16: Define fully connected layers
17: Apply Softmax activation for classification
18: Initialize model parameters
19: Define loss function (Categorical Crossentropy)
20: Select optimizer (Adam)
21: for each epoch do
22:
Perform forward pass
23:
Compute loss
24:
Perform backpropagation
25:
Update model weights
26: end for
27: Evaluate model on test data
28: Compute accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score
29: Perform prediction on new input sample
30: Return: Trained model

V. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
The experiments have been implemented in Python using
the TensorFlow and Keras libraries. Limited GPU availability
led to model training on a CPU-based computing system.
To evaluate the model performance, the dataset was split
into training and testing subsets. The evaluation was done
using a standard train-test split for fair comparison.
The following hyperparameters were used during training:
Batch size: 32
Number of epochs: 10
• Optimizer: Adam
• Loss function: Categorical Crossentropy
•
•

Adam optimizer was used as it is efficient on large data sets
and has adaptive learning capabilities. Because this is a multiclass classification problem, the categorical crossentropy loss
function was used.
The model performance was assessed with the help of
various metrics like accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score.
These metrics provide a full picture of how effective the model
is against various attack classes.

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed improvements including multi-class classification, dataset integration, CNN-LSTM integration, and real-time simulation,
along with their impact on system performance.

A. Training Environment
The experiments were carried out on a system with a
standard CPU because there were no GPU resources available.
Even with this limitation, the model was able to converge
steadily in a reasonable amount of time. These findings
demonstrate that the suggested approach is computationally
efficient and suitable for usage in settings with constrained
hardware resources.
The dataset, which included samples of both typical traffic
and different kinds of attacks, was big enough. The model
performed effectively across various network behavior patterns
thanks to this variety.
To avoid data leaks, the training and testing data were
also meticulously kept apart. This guarantees an accurate and
impartial assessment of the model’s overall performance.
VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION M ETRICS
The performance of the suggested model was assessed using
a number of common classification metrics.
An overall assessment of the model’s accuracy is provided
by accuracy, which quantifies the percentage of properly
predicted cases among all instances.

Precision shows the percentage of cases that were correctly
predicted to be positive.
Recall quantifies how well the model can find all pertinent
examples. This is especially crucial for intrusion detection
since it can have detrimental effects if an attack is missed.
The F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall,
which means it gives a fair assessment of how well the model
works.
These metrics are especially important in multi-class classification problems where the performance of different categories may be affected by class imbalance.
VII. R ESULTS
We found that the model had an overall accuracy of about
97% during testing.
The enhanced CNN-LSTM model outperforms the baseline
CNN model, according to the accuracy comparison graph.
The accuracy comparison graph shows that the improved
CNN-LSTM model performs better than the baseline CNN
model.
While the Recon class performs comparatively poorly, the
confusion matrix demonstrates good performance for DDoS
and DoS attacks.

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON
Metric
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score

CNN (Baseline)
94%
95%
94%
94%

CNN-LSTM (Proposed)
97%
97%
97%
96%

difficult to discern between reconnaissance efforts and typical
traffic behavior.
Additionally, the confusion matrix indicates that the majority of errors occur between the Recon and Benign groups.
This finding implies that future improvements should focus on
improving feature discrimination for these groups.
The findings demonstrate that while the suggested model is
excellent at identifying high-volume attacks, it still has room
for improvement when it comes to identifying nuanced and
low-intensity attack patterns.
VIII. D ISCUSSION

Fig. 3. Overall performance of the proposed CNN-LSTM model in terms of
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.

Training and validation accuracy are tightly correlated, and
the training graph demonstrates consistent learning.
Additionally, it is evident that the model achieves nearperfect categorization for DDoS and DoS classes. However,
the Recon class’s performance is far worse, suggesting that
it is more difficult to identify. This could be because typical
traffic patterns and recon traffic are similar.
Our tests also revealed that some misclassifications take
place in the Recon class, despite the model’s excellent performance for DDoS and DoS attacks. This is probably due to
the parallels between typical traffic patterns and recon traffic.
The class-wise performance research shows that the model
performs almost flawlessly against DDoS and DoS attacks.
Conversely, the Recon class has a slightly lower recall, suggesting that it is difficult to distinguish it from benign traffic.
This suggests that because Recon attacks resemble normal
behavior, they are more challenging to detect.
A. Detailed Analysis
Together with the overall results, a more thorough analysis
of class-wise performance reveals a number of significant
trends. The model achieves almost flawless precision and recall
when it comes to identifying DDoS and DoS attacks. This
shows that the spatial and temporal features of these attacks
may be efficiently captured by the CNN-LSTM architecture.
However, the Recon class performs comparatively worse,
especially when it comes to recall. This implies that certain
reconnaissance attacks are mistakenly categorized as typical
traffic. One explanation for this could be that the model finds it

Our results demonstrate that combining CNN and LSTM
improves the model’s performance. The accuracy results and
total classification performance also show this improvement.
Nevertheless, the approach still has issues with some
classes, like Recon, which need for more development.
We also ran into a number of problems during implementation, especially with managing missing or infinite values and
dataset preparation.
The suggested model has high generalization ability across
various assault scenarios in addition to the quantitative gains.
Sequential dependencies that are frequently missed by conventional CNN-based methods can be captured by the model
thanks to the LSTM layer.
In Internet of Things situations, where network traffic is
extremely dynamic and constantly shifting over time, this
capacity is particularly crucial. The model gets more resilient
and more appropriate for real-world scenarios by learning both
spatial and temporal features.
Additionally, the enhanced performance above the baseline
CNN model emphasizes the usefulness of hybrid architectures
for intrusion detection applications. The findings imply that
using a variety of deep learning methods can yield noticeably
better outcomes than depending just on one kind of model.
IX. L IMITATIONS
The suggested model still has a number of drawbacks
despite its excellent accuracy. Because of its resemblance to
benign traffic, it performs less well on the Recon class, making
correct categorization more challenging. Furthermore, because
the study was conducted offline, its performance in real-time
deployment can be different.
The suggested model shows improved generalization across
various assault types in addition to these quantitative gains. It
can identify sequential patterns that conventional CNN-based
techniques can miss because to the usage of LSTM-based
temporal learning.
Because network traffic is so dynamic and ever-changing
in real-world IoT applications, the model is therefore more
appropriate. In crucial IoT sectors like smart infrastructure,
this better detection capabilities can help to improve security.
X. F UTURE W ORK
Even if the suggested model works well, there are still a
few things that might be improved with more study.

Fig. 4. Comprehensive performance comparison between the original CNN model [1] and the proposed CNN-LSTM model. The results demonstrate improved
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, along with better generalization and class-wise performance.

Fig. 5. Class-wise performance comparison showing precision, recall, and
F1-score for each attack type.

Enhancing the detection of minority classes, like Recon
attacks, is a crucial path. The findings unequivocally demonstrate that the model has difficulty with this class, which
could be caused by the dataset’s class imbalance.Techniques

Fig. 6. Confusion matrix of the proposed model

like oversampling, undersampling, or synthetic data generation
(like SMOTE) may be employed to improve performance for
these classes.
Feature engineering and selection are two more areas that
need improvement. Even though all the features are currently

R EFERENCES

Fig. 7. Training and validation accuracy over epochs

used in the model, some of them may not have significant
impact on the forecast. The most relevant features can be
selected to improve the accuracy and to reduce the complexity.
Another direction is to investigate more complex deep
learning architectures. For instance, transformer-based models
or attention techniques could help the model to focus on
important network traffic patterns. These techniques have been
used for intrusion detection and proved good performance in
other areas.
“Another important avenue for future research is real-time
deployment. Even with a simple simulation, the model can
be connected to live network traffic systems to evaluate the
performance of the model in the real world.
Finally, there is room for improvement in the hyperparameter tuning. Changing factors like learning rate, batch
size, and number of layers can lead to better performance and
more stable training.
In summary, these improvements could lead to a higher
accuracy, reliability and applicability of the intrusion detection
system for operational uses.
Based on our current results, we believe that the performance of the model could be further improved by improving
the class balance.
XI. C ONCLUSION
We present an improved CNN-LSTM based intrusion detection system and evaluate its performance with network
traffic data in this paper. The results show better detection
performance and very good accuracy. The model has great
potential for practical applications.
Compared to the original CNN-based approach in [1], The
proposed paradigm shows better flexibility and performance
under challenging IoT network conditions.
The proposed model extends the CNN-based approach presented in [1] It uses an LSTM layer to learn temporal features
and perform multi-class classification, which improves the
detection performance.

[1] M. A. Khan, S. Abbas, A. Rehman, and T. Kim, “Securing Healthcare
with Deep Learning: A CNN-Based Model for Medical IoT Threat
Detection,” in Proc. 19th Iranian Conference on Intelligent Systems
(ICIS), 2024, pp. 168–173.
[2] R. Doshi, N. Apthorpe, and N. Feamster, “Machine learning DDoS
detection for consumer Internet of Things devices,” in Proc. IEEE
Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2018, pp. 29–35.
[3] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for intrusion
detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp.
21954–21961, 2017.
[4] A. Javaid, Q. Niyaz, W. Sun, and M. Alam, “A deep learning approach
for network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. IEEE EAI International
Conference on Bio-inspired Information and Communications Technologies, 2016.
[5] Y. Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 2016.
[6] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[7] M. Ahmed, A. Naser Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network
anomaly detection techniques,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 60, pp. 19–31, 2016.
[8] K. Alrawashdeh and C. Purdy, “Toward an online anomaly intrusion
detection system based on deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE SoutheastCon,
2016.
[9] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. IEEE Military Communications and Information Systems Conference (MilCIS), 2015.
[10] M. K. Shahzad, A. X. Liu, and A. Samuel, ”Secure Data Communication
in Internet of Things: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 1451–1485, 2020.
[11] M. K. Shahzad, M. H. Rehmani, and A. Rachedi, ”When Internet of
Things Meets Big Data Analytics: Challenges and Opportunities,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 208–215, 2019.
[12] M. K. Shahzad, S. A. Khan, and A. Ullah, ”A Survey on Security Issues
in Internet of Things,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 103, pp. 1–17, 2018.
[13] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[14] S. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, ”A Deep Learning
Approach to Network Intrusion Detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics
Comput. Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
[15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, ”Malware Traffic
Classification Using Convolutional Neural Network for Representation
Learning,” in Proc. IEEE ICICS, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[16] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, ”The evaluation of Network Anomaly Detection
Systems: Statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set,” in Proc. IEEE
MilCIS, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[17] M. Tavallaee et al., ”A detailed analysis of the KDD CUP 99 dataset,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Security Defense Appl., 2009, pp.
1–6.
[18] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, ”Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[19] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, ”Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,”
in Proc. ICLR, 2015.
[20] F. Chollet, Deep Learning with Python. Shelter Island, NY, USA:
Manning, 2017.
[21] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, ”ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. NIPS, 2012, pp.
1097–1105.
[22] Z. Lin, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, ”IDSGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Attack Generation against Intrusion Detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02077, 2018.
[23] M. Ring et al., ”A survey of network-based intrusion detection data
sets,” Comput. Security, vol. 86, pp. 147–167, 2019.

