International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com

Feature Classification and Outlier Detection to Increased Accuracy in
Intrusion Detection System

Nachiket Sainis

Durgesh Srivastava

Dr. Rajeshwar Singh

M.Tech Research Scholar
Department of Computer science & Engg.
BRCM CET, Bahal, Haryana India.

Research scholar
IKGPTU, Jalandhar

Professor
DOABA Group of Colleges Rahon,
SBS Nagar, Punjab India.

Intrusions are referred to as attempt to compromise the
integrity, availability and confidentiality of a computer system
or network [1]. IDS are hardware or software systems that
start process automatically for analyzing activities in a
computer network or network evaluating them for warning
signs of security problems [2].

Abstract
The day by day targeted network attacks is steadily
increasing and evolving, forcing businesses to revamp their
network security systems due to possible data and capital
losses. Intrusion Detection Systems is a very important
element for almost any security system. The key feature of
IDS is the active detection of unauthorized access that tries to
compromise the confidentiality, availability and Integrity of
computer or computer networks. Many researchers have
already developed security and advanced techniques to
explore technologies to detect cyber attacks with all DARPA
1998 dataset for Intrusion Detection and improved versions
of this KDD Cup'99, NSL-KDD Cup and GureKDDcup data
set.

Feature selection is the approach of eliminating the features of
the actual dataset that are unnecessary with reference to the
task being performed. Therefore, not only is the execution
time of the classifier processing the data decreases, but also
the accuracy improved, mainly because there are unnecessary
or redundant features consist of noisy data that badly affect
the classification accuracy [3].
In this paper, we propose a different feature selection
technique that uses the dataset that contains no outliers that
means outlier free dataset available in real time. The
classification algorithms C4.5, Random Forest, SVM, Naive
Bayes and K-NN will be evaluated using the dataset KDD
cup'99, NSL-KDD and GureKDDcup to identify four types of
attacks: Dos, Probe, R2L and U2R. The reduction of features
is implemented using common feature selection techniques
correlation-based Feature Selection (CFS). The final results of
the machine learning classifier are computed to compare
feature reduction techniques to show that our suggested model
works efficiently for network intrusion detection.

In this research, we evaluate the use of five ML classification
algorithm to deal with the attack classification problem. They
are SVM, Naive Bayes, KNN and the Decision Tree based
C4.5 (J48) and Random Forest Algorithm. The project
objective is to compare if some of the newer dataset and the
most advanced, such as NSL-KDD and GurKDDcup dataset,
could be much better candidates than older and overused
DARPA KDD Cup 1999. The exact number of available
features in a dataset clearly shows the relevance of detecting
specific types of attacks. Another objective of this research,
is to provide a suitable way to reduce the intricacies of the
developed classification models in the first phase by
reducing the features domain.
Keywords : Intrusion Detection system, Machine Learning
Algorithm, KDD Cup'99, GureKDDcup, NSL-KDD Cup,
Feature Selection, Outlier Detection.

DETECTION TECHNIQUES FOR IDS
1.

Anomaly based Intrusion detection

The anomaly-based intrusion detection specified as outliers,
peculiarities or exceptions are the data pattern which functions
abnormally. The anomaly detection technique is used to
discover patterns that are far from normal, while others are
marked as intrusion. Anomaly detections is categories as
dynamic and static detectors. The static anomaly detector is
considered part of the monitored system, which remains
constant. The static part contains two parts, the system code
and the system data. The static parts of the system can be
represented as one bit. In case of deviation from its original

INTRODUCTION
Network security is a primary problem nowadays since the
internet usage is increasing in multi-dimensions mainly
because of a lot more usage of portable gadgets. Intrusion
Detection Systems will be helpful to identify malign
intentions of network users without compromising the security
of the computer system and the network.

7249

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com
form, the error was reported or the burglar rebuilt the part of
the system.

wrapper method is generally viewed as a better subset of
features, but runs significantly slower than a filter [9].

The dynamic detector contains the definition of the system
behavior. The system behavior is defined as a series of
different pairs [4]. If unsafe actions is considered abnormal,
system administrators can be warned by false positives [6].

DATASET DESCRIPTION

2.

1.

KDDCup'99

KDD Cup’99 intrusion detection datasets that are based
totally on DARPA ’98 dataset [10] provides labelled dataset
for researcher running within the area of intrusion detection
and represent the publicly available labelled dataset. The
detailed description of KDD dataset is given in the next phase.
The KDD'99 dataset is created the usage of a simulation of an
army network. In the end, there is a sniffer which records all
transmitted network traffic data by using the Tcpdump format.
KDD training [11] dataset contains around 4,900,000 single
connection vectors, every one of which includes 41 attributes
and is categories as either an attack or normal, with precisely
one specified attack type. The simulated attacks classified
amongst the subsequent four classes: Denial of Service (Dos),
Remote to Local (r2l), Probe and User to Root (u2r) attacks
[12]. Features are labelled into four listed types:

Signature based Intrusion detection

Signature-based attack detection is known as misuse
detection. Here the dataset has several instances and all data
must be marked as normal or abnormal. To train the KDD
data, Machine learning classification algorithms are used as
per their label. This method is used to keep record that
automatically maintains the signature pattern to detect the
intruder in network computer. The misuse detection technique
is created automatically and the jobs are more complicated
and accurate than manual. Based on the robustness and
severity of an signature activated in the system, a notification
or alarm response must be sent to the concern authorities [5].
Relying on rules, a Signature based Detection System will try
correlate likely patterns to intrusion attempts. To access a
system, viruses try numerous steps in a particular pattern.

 Basic Features: These characteristics tend to be derived
from packet headers while no longer analyzing the
payload.
 Content Features: To analyze the actual TCP packet
payload, Domain knowledge is used and this
encompasses features which includes the large variety of
unsuccessful login attempts.
 Time-based Traffic Features: These features are created
to acquire properties accruing over a 2 second temporal
window. An example of such a feature will be the wide
range of connections to the exact same host over the
interval of 2 second.
 Host-based Traffic Features: Make use of a historical
window calculated over the numerous connections and it
is 100 in this case. Thus Host based attributes are created
to analyze attacks, which time frame longer than 2
seconds [13].

RELATED WORK
Feature Selection
Feature selection is very important to increase the
effectiveness of machine learning algorithms. This process
use for selection of a subset from original features based
on specific criteria, and this is a main and often used data
mining approach to reduce dimensionality. Most data contains
noisy, redundant and irrelevant features. Feature selection
approach minimizes the number of features, by eliminating
redundant, noisy and irrelevant features, and has significant
effects on applications: accelerating a machine learning
classification algorithm, improving learning accuracy and
performance improvement [7].
Filtering methods are generally used as a pre-processing step.
The feature selection is independent of a machine learning
classification algorithm. Selection of features according to
their scores in different statistical tests on their correlation
with the result variables [8]. These approach is very efficient
in computational time and robust to over-fitting.

Figure 1. Filter Method for Feature Selection Process
Figure 2. Statistics for Normal and Attack type in 10%KDD
CUP'99

There are two common ways of reducing features : A wrapper
uses the expected learning algorithm to evaluate the
usefulness of features, while a filter evaluates features
according to the general data properties. The

2. NSL KDD
The NSL KDD dataset is offline network data based totally on
KDD'99 dataset [14]. The NSL-KDD data set trained to solve

7250

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com
many different immanent issues of the KDDCUP'99 data set.
KDD CUP’99 is said to be broadly used data set for anomaly
detection [15] for locating accuracy in intrusion detection
[16]. The deficiency found in the KDD CUP’99 [10] data set
is the extensive quantity of duplicate record of approximately
78% in train set and 75% in test set, respectively. That makes
the learning algorithm rule biased, that makes U2R much
more vulnerable to the network. To resolve these types of
problems, the latest version of KDD dataset NSL-KDD is
offered.

utilized in any learning process. Most of the research projects
with kddcup database are performed by using the 10% of the
database available in UCI [18]. A reduced sample:
gureKddcup6percent which contain only no-flood attacks
matched with tcpdump.list along with a arbitrary subsample of
normal connections paired with tcpdump.list. Figure 4 shows
abnormal and normal class.

Advantages of NSL-KDD dataset over the original KDD cup
dataset:





No duplicate data found within the NSL-KDD train
data set, then the classifiers do not produce the result
biased.
The proposed test sets does not contain any duplicate
records, due to this the learners’ performance will not
be prevented and gives better detection rates.
The small number of records selected by each level of
difficulty is inversely proportional to the proportion of
records in the KDD dataset.
The dataset contains a reasonable number of samples
by train and test sets that makes it convenient to run
experiments on whole data sets without any
requirement to randomly consider a small part [17].

Figure 4. Statistics for Normal and Attack type in
GureKDDcup

EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
This experiment has been designed and implemented to
evaluate the KDD dataset with various machine learning
algorithm, based on generic metrics such as accuracy,
completeness, and other performance metrics; but also based
on the level of details the datasets provide, notably with
respect to attack classes, results are provided for every ML
algorithms.
For this experiment, a 10% subset of the KDD Cup 1999, a 6%
subset of the GureKDDCup dataset and full NSL-KDD dataset
is loaded into Weka, and all of its features are selected. Each
dataset will be run against the Random Forest, C4.5 (J48), Knearest Neighbour (KNN), Support vector Machines (SVM) and
Naive Bayes algorithms in Weka, with all features selected at
all time. In order to choose the best quality dataset candidate
for the later experiments when classifying certain attributes.

Figure 3. Statistics for Normal and Attack type in NSL-KDD
Cup'99

3.

GureKDD Cup

GureKDDcup dataset is consist of kddcup99 connections
(UCI repository database) also payload added to (network
packets contents) each and every connections. The
GureKDDCup capture group employs the similar methods
implemented to create kddcup99 [18]. They processed
tcpdump data files with bro-ids and also obtained every
connection with its proper features. And finally, the dataset is
labeled each and every connection according to the
connections-class files (tcpdump.list) which provided by MIT.
The Original dataset size is too large i.e 9.3 GB and the size of
6 percent dataset is 4.2 GB respectively.

Figure 5. Experimental Setup in Knowledge Flow

GureKddcup (and gureKddcup6percent) contains 41 features
same as the KDDcup'99. The gureKddcup is too big to be

7251

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com
Interquartile Range



The Interquartile range (IQR) is used to define the
propagation of a distribution. It's just the range where the
middle half of the data points are located. In simple terms it is
always the distance between the two quartiles IQR = Q3Q1. The quartiles of a classified list of data values are three
points that separate the data into exactly four equal parts,
with each and every part containing quarterly data [19].

The data with the selected features was used as input
to the three types of classifiers, C4.5, RF, SVM, NB
and KNN. Each classifier was tested and trained in
separate experiment.



The results of the classifiers were illustrated and
analyzed using evaluation criterion.



Q1 is referred to as the middle number between the
smallest number and the median of the dataset.



Q2 is the median of the dataset.



Q3 is the middle value between the median and the
highest value of the dataset.

Outlier Calculation Using Interquartile Range


Put the data in the correct order.



Calculate the first quartile (Q1)



Calculate the third quartile (Q3)



Calculate the inter quartile range (IQR) = Q3-Q1



Calculate the lower limit = Q1-(1.5*IQR)



Calculate upper limit = Q3+(1.5*IQR)

Figure 6. Block Diagram for Proposed Methodology

Everything outside the upper and lower boundary is an outlier.

The selected features by Outlier Removed dataset +CFS+BFS
algorithms for KDD cup'99, NSL-KDD cup and
GureKDDcup dataset are shown in Table I, Table II and Table
III, most relevant features selected from total 42 features.

Correlation Based Feature Selection (CFS)

Table I. CFS + BFS Selected Features for KDD cup'99

CFS is a simple filtering algorithm that belongs to subsets of
features and has discovered the merits of a feature or subset of
features of a correlation based heuristic evaluation
feature. The reason behind CFS is to discover subsets
consisting of features that strongly correlate with class and do
not correlate with each other. The remaining of the features
must be ignored. Irrelevant features must be omitted simply
because they strongly correlate with one or more of the
remaining features. The acceptance of selected features
depends entirely on how well classes in the instance range are
predicted that were not previously predicted by other features.
CFS‟ s feature evaluation function is shown as below [20].

Feature No.
14
8
30
5
7
4
2
23
36
6
3

Main steps for feature selection process can be presented as
below

Description
lroot_shell
wrong_fragment
diff_srv_rate
src_bytes
land
flag
protocol_type
count
dst_host_same_src_port_rate
dst_bytes
service

Type
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Discrete
Discrete
Discrete
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Discrete

Table II. CFS + BFS Selected Features for NSL-KDD Cup



Start weka and select the tab explorer from the
Application menu.



Click on open file and load the outlier removed
dataset. Click on select attributes tab



Choose attribute evaluator as cfsSubsetEval and
search method as Best First search (BFS) then click
on start.



Most relevant features based on Best First Search
feature selection algorithms were selected.

7252

Feature No.
4
5
6
26
12
30

Description
flag
src_bytes
dst_bytes
srv_serror_rate
logged_in
diff_srv_rate

Type
Discrete
Continuous
Continuous
Continuous
Discrete
Continuous

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com
Table III. CFS + BFS Selected Features for GureKDDcup
Feature No.
7
8
10
3
11

Description
land
wrong_fragment
hot
service
num_failed_logins

Type
Discrete
Continuous
Continuous
Discrete
Continuous

RESULT ANALYSIS
Each dataset is evaluated with machine learning classification
algorithm C4.5, K-Nearest Neighbour, Naive Bayes, SVM and
Random Forest were tested before and after feature selection.
Table IV. Different dataset Accuracy & AUC with
classification algorithm
Classification
Algorithm

Proposed
ROC
Meth.
Curve
Accuracy (AUC)%

KDD Cup'99

C4.5

99.94%

1.0

NSL-KDD cup

C4.5

99.38%

0.95

GureKDD cup

C4.5

99.06%

0.75

KDD Cup'99

K-NN

99.90%

1.0

NSL-KDD cup

K-NN

99.43%

0.95

GureKDD cup

K-NN

99.08%

1.0

KDD Cup'99

Naive Bayes

96.16%

0.87

NSL-KDD cup

Naive Bayes

81.88%

0.79

GureKDD cup

Naive Bayes

99.03%

0.86

KDD Cup'99

Random Forest

99.94%

1.0

NSL-KDD cup

Random Forest

99.38%

0.95

GureKDD cup

Random Forest

99.08%

1.0

KDD Cup'99

SVM

99.94%

0.92

NSL-KDD cup

SVM

88.09%

0.83

GureKDD cup

SVM

99.06%

0.93

Dataset

Figure 7. ROC Curve for KDD Cup'99

Figure 8. ROC Curve for NSL-KDD Cup

The Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (ROC) and its
Area under the Curve (AUC) are used for the performance
analysis of the classifier. It ranges from 0 to 1 and an attribute
that is perfectly correlated to the class provides a value of 1.
Here, 1 is the best possible value. The KNN and Random
Forests algorithm are shown preeminent results almost among
all the datasets i.e. 100% (accuracy).

Figure 9. ROC Curve for GureKDD Cup

7253

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com
The obtained results are displayed in Table IV, and along with
AUC (Area under curve) for all five classifiers with three
different datasets Figure 7, Figure 8 and Figure 9 represents
the Area under curve.
Building time for three dataset was very less with 11, 6 and 5
features was selected by BFS for KDD cup'99, NSL-KDD and
GureKDDcup respectively as shown in Table V. The accuracy
slightly decreased but the model building time dropped down
which is a great deal of time efficiency level. By applying
feature selection process it is clear that the time of all models
dropped down in to less than 50%, That means also the
reduction of computations size; i.e less computation
complexity. This reduction was a result of number of selected
features.
Table V. Model building Time with different Classifiers
before and after OR+FS
Dataset

Classification
Algorithm

Time Taken Time Taken
before
After
OR+FS
OR+FS

KDD Cup'99
NSL-KDD cup
GureKDD cup
KDD Cup'99
NSL-KDD cup
GureKDD cup
KDD Cup'99
NSL-KDD cup
GureKDD cup
KDD Cup'99
NSL-KDD cup
GureKDD cup
KDD Cup'99
NSL-KDD cup
GureKDD cup

C4.5
C4.5
C4.5
K-NN
K-NN
K-NN
Naive Bayes
Naive Bayes
Naive Bayes
Random Forest
Random Forest
Random Forest
SVM
SVM
SVM

119.53 sec
46.95 sec
55.93 sec
0.37 sec
0.15 sec
0.13 sec
5.63 sec
1.76 sec
1.86 sec
554.63 sec
157.93 sec
166.48 sec
689.07 sec
3126.7 sec
302.44 sec

Figure 11. Overall Accuracy analysis of proposed technique
in NSL-KDD cup
In accuracy analysis graph OR+FS means outliers removal
and feature selection which is proposed methodology and next
is OR+NFS means outliers removal with no feature selection
and last is NOR+FS means no outliers removal with feature
selection.

23.15 sec
7.14 sec
1.28 sec
0.23 sec
0.04 sec
0.03 sec
1.36 sec
0.22 sec
0.23 sec
205.97 sec
83.73 sec
27.6 sec
186.53 sec
1356.73
secsec
98.91

Figure 12. Overall Accuracy analysis of proposed technique
in GureKDDcup

Finally, the complexity of the models was reduced in to a
respectable amount, the process of finding the class was a
function of (41 features), it reduced to a function of (11, 6 and
5 features) in the proposed method.

CONCLUSION
The usage of a network intrusion detection system in order to
detect cyber-attacks and determine defense configuration, we
are using Machine Learning (ML) techniques with different
classification methods for the dataset. In this study, we have
developed five models to solve the IDS issue using SVM,
KNN, Naive Bayes and the decision tree based C4.5 (J48) and
Random Forest algorithm. Number of attacks were classified
using the above mentioned five methods. The importance of
choosing a relevant amount of features for classification.

Figure 10. Overall Accuracy analysis of proposed technique
in KDD cup'99

7254

International Journal of Applied Engineering Research ISSN 0973-4562 Volume 13, Number 10 (2018) pp. 7249-7255
© Research India Publications. http://www.ripublication.com
Although it is beneficial to know what specific cyber-attack
you are exposed to, the large number of classes for
classification decreases the accuracy of all the machine
learning classification algorithms. To increase the possibility
to render properly created decisions regarding defense
configuration, the best features for classification are
categories of cyber- attacks such as DoS, U2R, Probing and
R2L attacks.

[10]

KDD Cup 1999 Intrusion Detection Dataset. [Online].
Available:http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kd
d cup99.html

[11]

Ebrahim Bagheri, Wei Lu, Mahbod Tavallaee and Ali
A. Ghorbani , “A Detailed Analysis of the KDD CUP
99 Data Set”, in IEEE Symposium on Computational
Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications,
2009. CISDA 2009.

To enhance the efficiency of the proposed models and
speeding up the detection process, first we detect outliers
using Interquartile Range (IQR) and apply a filter called
Remove with values to remove outliers and after that set of
features were selected using the CFS subset Eval and Best
First Search method (BFS). A comparison between the
developed models without feature selection and with feature
selection was provided. The developed models were designed
for decreasing the complexity while maintaining the appropriate
detection accuracy. The decision tree based Random Forest,
K- Nearest Neighbour and C4.5 algorithm achieved the
maximum classification accuracy compared to other search
techniques explored in this work. The Random Forest and
KNN algorithm work best with all three dataset with ROC of
1.000, which shows algorithm fully representative by training
data.

[12]

P. GiftyJeya, M. Ravichandran, C. S. Ravichandran
“Efficient Classifier for R2L and U2R Attacks” in
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 –
8887) Volume 45– No.21, May 2012

[13]

H. GünesKayacık, A. NurZincir-Heywood, Malcolm I.
Heywood, “Selecting Features for Intrusion Detection:
A Feature Relevance Analysis on KDD 99 Intrusion
Detection Datasets” in Third Annual Conference on
Privacy, Security and Trust, October 12-14, 2005

[14]

P. Bhoria, K. Kanwal Garg. “Determining feature set of
DOS attacks”, in International Journal of Advanced
Research in Computer Science and Software
Engineering, vol.3 issue 5, May 2013, pp. 875-878.

[15]

Hee-su Chae, Byung-oh Jo, Sang-Hyun Choi, Twaekyung Park, “Feature Selection for Intrusion Detection
using NSL-KDD” in Recent Advances in Computer
Science.

[16]

S. Revathi, Dr. A. Malathi, “A Detailed Analysis on
NSL-KDD Dataset Using Various Machine Learning
Techniques for Intrusion Detection” in International
Journal of Engineering Research & Technology
(IJERT) Vol. 2 Issue 12, December 2013

[17]

http://www.unb.ca/research/iscx/dataset/iscx-NSLKDD-dataset.html

[18]

https://addi.ehu.es/bitstream/handle/10810/20608

REFERENCES
[1]

Shilpa Lakhina, Sini Joseph, Bhupendra verma, Feature
Reduction using Principal Component Analysis for
Effective Anomaly–Based Intrusion Detection on NSLKDD, International Journal of Engineering Journal of
Engineering Science and Technology

[2]

R.Bace and P. Mell, NIST Special Publication on
Intrusion Detection Systems, 2001.

[3]

Y Yang, JO Pedersen, A comparative study on the effect
of feature selection on classification accuracy,
Procedia Technology 1, 2012, pp.323– 327.

[4]

Karthikeyan .K.R and A. Indra- “Intrusion Detection
Tools and Techniques a Survey”

[5]

Vera Marinova-Boncheva-“A Short Survey of Intrusion
Detection Systems”-. Bulgarian academy of sciences.

[6]

Application and Signature based IDS Retrived from
http://www.idconline.com/technical_references/pdfs/da
ta_communications/Application_and_Signature_Based
_IDS.pdf

[7]

Liu H ,Setiono R, Motoda H, Zhao Z, Feature
Selection: An Ever Evolving Frontier in Data Mining,
JMLR: Workshop and Conference Proceedings 10,
2010, pp. 4-13

[8]

Website https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2016
/12/introduction-to-feature-selection-methods-withan- example-or-how-to-select-the-right-variables/

[9]

Y. Kim, W. N. Street, F. Menczer, and G. J.Russell,
“Feature selection in data mining” in Data Mining:
Opportunities and Challenges: J. Wang, Ed. Hershey, PA:
Idea Group Publishing, 2003, pp. 80–105.

/20160601_Txostena_gurekddcup_InigoPeronaBalda.p
df?sequence=1

7255

[19]

Website https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/interquartile range-iqr/

[20]

Hall, M. (1999). Correlation-based Feature Selection
for Machine Learning. Ph. D. thesis, University of
Waikato.

