P4-NIDS: High-Performance Network
Monitoring and Intrusion Detection in P4

arXiv:2411.17987v2 [cs.NI] 23 Dec 2024

Yaying Chen1 , Siamak Layeghy1 , Liam Daly Manocchio1 , and Marius
Portmann1
School of EECS, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, Australia
yaying.chen@uq.net.au, siamak.layeghy@uq.net.au, liam@riftcs.com and
marius@ieee.org

Abstract. This paper presents a high-performance, scalable network
monitoring and intrusion detection system (IDS) implemented in P4.
The proposed solution is designed for high-performance environments
such as cloud data centers, where ultra-low latency, high bandwidth,
and resilient infrastructure are essential. Existing state-of-the-art (SoA)
solutions, which rely on traditional out-of-band monitoring and intrusion detection techniques, often struggle to achieve the necessary latency and scalability in large-scale, high-speed networks. Unlike these
approaches, our in-band solution provides a more efficient, scalable alternative that meets the performance needs of Terabit networks. Our
monitoring component captures extended NetFlow v9 features at wire
speed, while the in-band IDS achieves high-accuracy detection without
compromising on performance. In evaluations on real-world P4 hardware,
both the NetFlow monitoring and IDS components maintain negligible
impact on throughput, even at traffic rates up to 8 million packets per
second (mpps). This performance surpasses SoA in terms of accuracy and
throughput efficiency, ensuring that our solution meets the requirements
of large-scale, high-performance environments.

Keywords: P4 programming, Network Monitoring, Intrusion Detection, Software Defined Networking, High Performance Networking

1

Introduction

High-performance networks should be able to transfer vast amounts of data
with very minimal delays, usually in the order of microseconds, so that realtime applications in areas such as cloud computing are realised. They must meet
strict requirements to support modern applications and services, including ultralow latency, high bandwidth, scalability, and resilience [1]. In addition, these
networks need to maintain consistent performance under varying load conditions
and scale effectively to handle increasing traffic demands. Robust security and
intrusion detection are essential to protect sensitive data and ensure operational
integrity against ongoing cyber threats. Equally important is efficient resource

2

Yaying Chen et al.

management, achieved through advanced monitoring to optimise performance
and resource allocation [2].
To meet these requirements, advanced monitoring techniques are essential
for keeping high-performance networks running smoothly. Real-time visibility
allows for the immediate identification and response to potential issues before
they impact users. This includes monitoring network traffic patterns, device performance, and application behaviour [3]. Telemetry data from various network
elements provides valuable insights for capacity planning and performance optimisation. Additionally, end-to-end monitoring across the entire network path
aids in troubleshooting complex issues in distributed environments [4].
Similarly, intrusion detection plays a critical role in enforcing security measures. Modern intrusion detection techniques go beyond simple port-based methods, which only check port numbers assigned to specific applications. Instead
they incorporate Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) and machine learning (ML) algorithms to accurately identify application types and traffic patterns. Traffic
flows, in particular, are widely used for network traffic analysis to extract information related to applications based on their network behaviour. However, in
high-performance networks, real-time intrusion detection that enables dynamic
policy enforcement and mitigates security threats remains a challenging problem [5, 6].
P4 (Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors) [7] is a domainspecific language designed to specify how packets are processed by the data
planes of network forwarding elements. Its introduction brought a revolutionary
approach to networking and network management by enabling the programming of data planes [8]. This programmability empowers network operators to
define custom packet processing logic directly within network devices, unlocking
new possibilities for fine-grained traffic analysis and adaptive monitoring. An
additional advantage of P4 is its protocol independence, ensuring that solutions
developed with it are future-proof, capable of adapting to new network protocols
and evolving traffic patterns. This makes P4 a strong foundation for achieving
high performance in network management.
While P4 offers significant advantages for monitoring and intrusion detection, it also has several limitations [9]. First, the memory and processing capabilities available in hardware switches for P4 are limited [10], which restricts the
complexity of monitoring and classification algorithms that can be implemented
directly in the data plane. As a result, more complex analysis often needs to be
offloaded to external systems, which can introduce additional latency and reduce
real-time responsiveness. Secondly, since P4 focuses on packet-level processing,
maintaining state across multiple packets-essential for many advanced intrusion
detection techniques-becomes challenging [11].
This research proposes a P4-based monitoring and intrusion detection solution for high-performance networks, designed to operate within SDN data plane
limitations. Our monitoring solution captures NetFlow [12] data with enhanced
v.9 features, not found in previous solutions, and runs at wire speed, making it
ideal for Terabit networks. We also implement a lightweight, flow-based intrusion

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

3

detection system, as proposed in [13], within P4. This system uses NetFlow data
from our monitoring module, addressing the need for cross-packet state tracking.
The main contributions of this research can be summarised as:
– Development of a high-performance, in-band network monitoring
solution in P4
We design and implement a NetFlow exporter capable of generating advanced NetFlow v.9 fields, which is not typically available in standard solutions. This exporter operates at wire speed and is capable of providing
real-time network traffic visibility, offering a more scalable and efficient alternative to traditional out-of-band solutions.
– In-band implementation of a lightweight and efficient NIDS in P4
Our NIDS solution operates directly within the data plane, independent of
the SDN controller, offering low-latency, high-throughput security monitoring. This approach improves real-time detection capabilities without compromising overall network performance.
– Comprehensive performance evaluation in a 40 Gbps P4 hardware
We assess both the NetFlow exporter and the NIDS in terms of computational overhead and impact on throughput. Our solution is capable of processing traffic rates up to 8 million packets per second (mpps) with minimal
impact on throughput, even when both modules are active. By comparing
our approach with state-of-the-art solutions, we demonstrate the superior
efficiency and scalability of our solution for high-speed networks.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of
P4 programming and the NetFlow format. Section 3 discusses previous research
in the fields of in-band network monitoring and intrusion detection, analysing
their strengths and limitations. The following section outlines the methodology for in-band NetFlow generation and NIDS implementation in P4. Section 5
presents an evaluation of the proposed solutions, first in an emulated network
environment and then on a 40 Gbps P4 hardware setup, with results for each
experimental configuration. Finally, Section 6 summaries the key findings and
concludes the paper.

2

Background

2.1

P4 Programming

The Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors (P4) is an opensource SDN data plane programming language that was introduced in 2014
with the aim of providing reconfigurability in the field, protocol independence,
and target independence. This indicates that P4 programmers should have the
capability to modify how switches handle packets after they are deployed. It
suggests that switches should not be restricted to particular network protocols,
and programmers should have the freedom to define packet-processing functions
regardless of the complex details of the hardware they are built upon [7].

4

Yaying Chen et al.

Through the separation of packet processing logic from hardware, P4 empowers devices to accommodate diverse networking protocols and provides developers with the flexibility to adjust device behavior without hardware modifications.
This decoupling promotes innovation and adaptability in networking, enabling
developers to explore new protocols, enhance network performance, and create
tailored traffic management policies. Additionally, P4 facilitates the prototyping and implementation of novel networking features, enabling rapid iteration
on designs without extensive hardware alterations. This speeds up development
timelines and facilitates quicker deployment of advanced networking functionalities and services, providing more agile and effective network infrastructures.
The P4 ecosystem provides a comprehensive suite of tools, compilers, libraries, and targets for the development, testing, and deployment of P4-based
network functions. There are some critical components within that ecosystem
and the language itself, which play a very important role in materializing programmable network infrastructure. These key elements are explained as follows:

– P4 Language: At the core is the P4 language, which provides a protocolindependent and very flexible way of specifying packet processing behavior
to network engineers or developers. P4 abstracts the hardware specification
and hence makes it possible to program network equipment for specific use
cases and requirements.
– P4 Compiler: The P4 compiler, developed at ETH [14], is a member of
the family of portable compilers that translate high-level P4 programs into
lower-level, target-specific implementations. Optimizations are created, and
configurations are generated for specific devices in order to guarantee efficient
packet processing. P4 conformance, which means conformance of a target to
the language specification with respect to syntax, semantics, and features
of P4, is quite important for the correct interpretation and execution of P4
programs.
– P4 Runtime Environment: P4Runtime is a protocol-agnostic API that
allows field reconfigurability. In particular, it offers the following abilities:
dynamic deployment of a new P4 forwarding plane onto devices without
needing code recompilation [15]. Network operators can update packet processing logic dynamically without any disruption to operations.
– P4 Targets: These are the platforms (hardware or software) on which
P4 programs can be run. They include programmable Application-Specific
Integrated Circuits, FPGA-based SmartNICs, software switches like Open
vSwitch, and Programmable Network Processors [16].
– P4 Tools and Utilities: These are a raft of resources to help develop and
debug P4 programs provided by P4 community. These range from debuggers,
packet trace analysis tools, libraries, frameworks that enable many common
networking tasks and protocols using the P4 language and simulation software.

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

2.2

5

NetFlow

Network management and security require the collection and analysis of network
traffic. There are three main approaches to network data collection. At one end of
the spectrum is the collection of high-level information related to network device
management. An example of this approach is the Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP), an internet standard for monitoring and managing network
devices. SNMP allows network administrators to gather information about network devices, such as routers, switches, servers, and printers, by polling these
devices for various metrics such as bandwidth usage, interface errors, and CPU
load. This approach provides a basic overview of network health and performance but lacks the detailed information needed for many network security and
troubleshooting operations.
On the other end of the spectrum is packet capturing, where all traffic packets passing through monitoring points are collected and recorded. While this
method provides much more detailed and useful information compared to the
first approach, it is almost impractical in large-scale real-world networks due
to the storage requirements and concerns regarding the privacy and security of
network users and servers.
The third approach involves summarising network traffic statistics as network
flows, balancing between the detailed but storage-intensive packet capturing and
the high-level statistics of SNMP-like protocols. Network flows are identified by
common attributes known as the five-tuple, including source and destination IP
addresses, L4 (transport layer) ports, and the L4 protocol, representing a series
of packets. This approach is widely adopted in the networking industry for its
scalability and practicality.
Accordingly, all major producers of network devices have developed or
adopted methods for network flow collection. For example, Huawei uses the NetStream protocol, Juniper uses Jflow, Alcatel uses cflow, and s-flow is employed by
several large network device manufacturers. However, the most widely adopted
network flow collection protocol is Cisco’s NetFlow, proposed in 1996 by Darren
and Barry Bruins [17]. NetFlow is also the basis for an Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF) standard for flow information, known as Internet Protocol
Flow Information Export (IPFIX). There are different versions of the NetFlow
protocol that provide varying levels of information about network traffic. While
NetFlow version 5 is unidirectional with a limited set of features, NetFlow version 9, the most common version, offers bi-directional flow information with a
much broader set of features [18].

3

Related Work

Since the proposed method for intrusion detection in this research is flow-based,
and we have also developed a method for in-band NetFlow generation/extraction, we review the related works in both fields. First, we focus on prior approaches to in-band NetFlow generation, then we examine existing in-band flowbased intrusion detection systems, highlighting the techniques and models they
employ to establish the context and limitations that our work addresses.

6

3.1

Yaying Chen et al.

In-band Network Monitoring

FlowStalker [19] is proposed to enhance the ability of monitoring traffic flows
directly on the data plane, without relying on external controllers or middleboxes. The main idea is to leverage P4 to monitor network flows directly on the
data plane. FlowStalker allows for capturing a wide range of metrics, including
packet counts, byte counts, and a few other flow statistics. While FlowStalker
brings flexibility to directly monitor a wide range of traffic metrics on the data
plane, it does so at an extra cost with respect to management and optimisation of the monitoring rules. This extra complexity is more critical in large-scale
network environments that are dynamic in nature, with traffic patterns constantly changing with a high number of flows. Additionally, FlowStalker has
not been evaluated on real-world hardware, as the authors relied exclusively on
BMv2 [20], a P4 software switch that does not fully capture the constraints and
performance characteristics of production-grade devices. This gap leaves open
questions about how well FlowStalker would scale under the resource limitations
and high-throughput demands of actual hardware environments.
P4Flow [21], proposes a flow monitoring tool for cloud provider networks
implemented on programmable data planes. It allows the providers to monitor
a set of desired flows according to their needs, offering more granular control
over what is monitored and how data is collected. The system is designed to
operate without the need for extensive controller intervention, enabling monitoring directly on the network switches. While it is claimed that P4Flow can
reduce the overhead of reporting the flow statistics by considering the properties
of the inter-node links such as delay and bandwidth, they have not included
the effect of monitoring flows via P4Flow on throughput or other resources. Although P4Flow is powerful in monitoring network traffic, it comes at a high
resource cost in terms of memory, processing power, and other resources on the
switch, which might be exhausted and hence limit its deployment, especially
on resource-constrained environments. Network operators need to manage these
resources cautiously, probably at the cost of monitoring details versus total network performance, to let P4Flow be effectively deployed without overwhelming
the underlying hardware.
P4-based Proactive Monitoring (PPM) [22] adopts a proactive approach to
enhance the efficiency of monitoring collection operations. It collects and processes network data in real time directly within the network devices. This is
in contrast to traditional reactive monitoring schemes that rely on the central
controller to request data from switches. PPM allows programmable switches
to proactively forward monitoring information to the controller after the controller enables PPM. The measurement results show that PPM can not only
enhance the efficiency of collecting monitoring information by applying a proactive mechanism but also minimise the general monitoring overhead compared to
the polling-based methods. However, PPM still requires the SDN controller as
coordinator and while the scheme reduces direct dependence on the controller,
the controller still plays an essential role as a coordinator. It can configure the
P4 programs deployed on the switches and set policies that dictate how monitor-

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

7

ing should be conducted. In addition, the performance evaluation with realistic
traffic rates is missing in this research.

3.2

In-band Intrusion Detection

IISY [23] explores using commodity programmable switches for in-network classification. While it is not designed as an NIDS, it could feasibly be adapted for
this purpose. It focuses on mapping trained machine learning models to matchaction pipelines, and introduces a prototype named In-network Inference made
easy(IIsy). Support for the integration of four machine learning models at the
data plane level: decision trees, support vector machines, K-means, is illustrated.
The authors also discuss the adaptability of their approach to various targets
and suggest that their solution can be extended to include additional machine
learning algorithms. However, the approach is inherently limited in accuracy due
to the types of features it can extract. This restriction can impact the reliability
of the classification process. Also, deploying updates to classification models requires changes through the control plane, which could add complexity and delay
in adapting to new requirements or improving model performance.
Researchers at Purdue University proposed Leo [24] for online intrusion detection capable of handling multi-terabit line rates. It employs a machine learning model that operates within the data plane of network switches. In order
to achieve higher speeds, Leo restricts the number of features used for packet
classification to 10, and this limitation affects the accuracy of classification for
complex traffic patterns. In addition, while Leo supports deeper trees than many
previous systems (up to depth in TCAMs), it still relies on balancing between
tree depth and accuracy, which could lead to performance issues if the depth
is insufficient for certain classification tasks. In summary, while Leo presents a
promising approach to online intrusion detection, its limited classification accuracy highlights the need for alternative solutions in this field.
MAP4 [25] is a framework designed to explore the feasibility of deploying
ML models in programmable network devices. It deploys a pre-trained DecisionTree model into a programmable switch, allowing for accurate flow classification
at line rate. The results demonstrate that most flows can be correctly classified with just a few packets. In some scenarios, 97% of the traffic is accurately
classified with only two packets per flow, while all traffic classes are correctly
labelled using a maximum of four packets. However, the MAP4 framework requires a concurrency control mechanism implemented in Micro C language to
prevent race conditions arising from parallel packet processing. This reliance on
an external component introduces a dependency outside the P4 ecosystem and
could limit portability across different hardware platforms.
In order to address the shortcomings of the previous systems, as explained
above, this paper proposes an approach for both network monitoring and intrusion detection, implemented purely in P4, with no use of the SDN controller or
reliance on any other languages.

8

Yaying Chen et al.
Controller

Controller (P4-Util)

Programmable Data Plane

BMv2 Switch

NetFlow Generator

Network Traffic
Packet

Machine Learning
Model

Label

NetFlow Generator

Network Traffic
Packet

Machine Learning
Model

Label

Fig. 1. P4-NIDS architecture in left) Hardware data plane and Right) BMv2 emulation
environment

4

Method

Figure 1 shows the overall architecture of the proposed solution for both
hardware-based and emulation-based implementation. The left figure shows the
implementation in a P4-compatible hardware data plane, and the right figure
shows the implementation in BMv2 emulation environment. As can be seen, in
both implementations there are two main components: a NetFlow generator/exporter and a pre-trained ML model. In this section, we initially explain the
NetFlow generator/exporter implementation, then we discuss the implementation of the pre-trained ML model.
4.1

NetFlow Generator in P4

Upon arrival at a switch port, each packet is processed by the NetFlow Generator component, which logs flows using a Flow ID. This Flow ID is derived
from applying a hash function to the packet’s 5-tuple (destination IP, source IP,
destination port, source port, and protocol). The Flow ID serves as a key for
accessing entries in the NetFlow Table (Figure 2) within the P4 Switch. This
table is organised as an array of registers, where each unique NetFlow field is
stored in its own designated P4 Register. When flows are analysed for intrusion

Fig. 2. NetFlow Table, and fields used to create the hash value for a flow entry

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

9

detection, e.g., by an ML-based NIDS, these registers can be accessed by the ML
model directly on the data plane. Currently, the system supports 12 NetFlow
fields [26] , enabling the necessary features for an ML-based NIDS. Additional
NetFlow fields could be generated similarly if required.
Furthermore, these registers are accessible from the control plane using the
P4-Utils [27] API, allowing periodic exports as CSV files or transmission to an
external NetFlow collector server. This module can therefore function independently as a P4-implemented NetFlow Exporter.
4.2

ML-based NIDS in P4

The P4 language is designed mainly for packet processing but has several limitations that make it difficult to implement most machine learning models. P4 lacks
general-purpose computation features like variables, loops, and functions. It also
has limited memory and stateful processing because it relies on basic registerbased storage, and it does not support floating-point arithmetic or complex data
types, which are essential for many machine learning tasks. Furthermore, P4’s
control flow is not flexible enough to handle the complex logic needed for machine
learning models, such as recursive functions or deep learning architectures. The
absence of built-in machine learning libraries adds to the challenge, requiring
developers to implement fundamental algorithms from scratch. [8].
While P4 has limitations, it is still possible to implement certain models,
such as Decision Tree classifiers, Random Forests, and simple regression models
using its available instruction set. While simple neural network models have also
been implemented in P4 environments, this was made possible by extending the
basic capabilities with custom data structures, specialised processing pipelines,
and leveraging additional hardware resources such as lookup tables (LUTs) and
parallel processing [28]. Given that P4 offers minimal support for training machine learning models, we can only deploy pre-trained models. For the purpose of
network intrusion detection, we used a pre-trained DT model, as proposed and
evaluated in [13], to illustrate the feasibility of implementing an efficient in-band
NIDS that can work in high throughput environments. This pre-trained Decision
Tree classifier was selected because of its efficient design, which delivers strong
classification performance across several publicly available benchmark datasets,
making it a practical choice within P4’s constraints for high-performance network traffic analysis.
The adopted DT classifier is a NetFlow-based NIDS that uses NetFlow fields
to form the conditions within if-else statements. Given P4’s limited expressiveness and control flow capabilities, it is notable that the language still supports
the use of multiple if-else statements, allowing for the implementation of this
DT model. The main part of the DT classifier code, as implemented in our P4
program, is shown in code listing 1.1. In this implementation, NetFlow fields,
read from P4 registers, are distributed across the if-else statements based on the
conditions defined by the pre-trained DT model, as proposed in [13]. Despite
P4’s constraints, this approach effectively leverages the language’s capabilities
to achieve the desired network intrusion detection.

10

Yaying Chen et al.

Listing 1.1. Decision Tree Implementation in P4
1

...

2

bit<32> IN PKTS;//1

3

bit<16> MIN IP PKT LEN;//5

4

...

5

bit<16> L4 DST PORT;//17

6

bit<16> L4 SRC PORT;//18

7

received packet counter.read(IN PKTS,current flow id);

8

...

9

dstport register.read(L4 DST PORT,current flow id);

10

srcport register.read(L4 SRC PORT,current flow id);

11

if(TCP WIN MAX OUT <= 26865) {
if(NUM PKTS 1024 TO 1514 BYTES <= 120) {

12

if(IN PKTS <= 45) {

13

if(MIN TTL <= 36) {

14
15

if(TCP WIN MAX OUT <= 2) {

16

malicious flag register.write(current flow id,1);

17

} else {

18

...

19

} else {

malicious flag register.write(current flow id,0);

20

...

21

5

Evaluation and Results

In this study, we conducted two sets of experiments. The first set involved using
an emulated network environment to validate the proof of concept and compare the performance of our model with previous solutions that were evaluated
solely in emulated environments. In the second phase, we used a real-world P4compatible hardware setup to assess the system’s performance under practical
conditions, offering a more accurate measure of its effectiveness and scalability
evaluated on a real-world P4-compatible hardware setup.
5.1

Emulated Environment

Experimental Setup Figure 3 illustrates the emulated network used in this
study. For our emulated network setup, we utilised a Dell Optiplex 7070 machine
equipped with an Intel Core i7-9700 CPU operating at 3.00 GHz and 24GB of
DDR4 2666 MHz RAM. The host operating system was a Desktop Ubuntu
22.04 (kernel 6.5.0-25-generic). All experiments were conducted on a VirtualBox

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

11

eth0

DDoS Traffic

P1
P3
P2 BMV2 Switch

eth0

Target Host

eth0

UQ Traffic

Mininet Environment
Fig. 3. Emulated network setup

VM configured with 6 virtual CPU core (100% capacity) and 8 GB RAM, running Desktop Ubuntu 16.04 (Kernel 4.4.0-150-generic). The network elements,
including clients and servers for both benign and attack traffic, as well as the
target host, were created using the Mininet network emulator [29]. Mininet is
the standard emulation tool employed by the P4 consortium to test P4 program
functionalities.
We implemented our DT classifier in the P4 software switch, BMV2 [20],
based on P4-16 [30] with P4-Utils [27]. For the performance and overhead evaluation of the implemented modules, the NetFlow exporter and DT-based classifier
we used iperf [31].
Performance Evaluation To evaluate the scalability of the proposed solution,
we started by setting a baseline, measuring the system’s initial performance metrics. Following this, we applied our proposed algorithms to observe any changes
in performance. Accordingly, Our experiments included three different scenarios
to thoroughly evaluate the system’s behaviour:
1. Basic Port Forwarding: In this scenario, only a simple port forwarding
setup is implemented. All packets arriving at either port P1 or P2 are forwarded to port P3, and vice versa, with no additional processing.
2. NetFlow Generation Enabled: In this case, we enabled NetFlow generation for the packets being forwarded between switch ports.
3. DT-based NIDS Enabled: Finally, in this scenario, we activated the DTbased NIDS, which is responsible for classifying network traffic flows as either
benign or potentially malicious.
Throughout all three scenarios, the CPU utilisation consistently remained at
0.3%, indicating that the added NetFlow exporter and DT-based classifier modules impose a minimal load on the processor when emulated on the BMv2 switch.
This suggests that our additional modules scale efficiently without overloading
the system’s CPU.

12

Yaying Chen et al.

P4-NIDS

FlowStalker

Throughput MBits / Second

80

60

40

20

0
0

5

7

9

11

Number of NetFlow Fields

Fig. 4. Throughput comparison of P4-NIDS and FlowStalker by NetFlow features

For comparison, we used two recent implementation of similar approaches in
P4. As highlighted in the related work, FlowStalker [19] represents the current
state-of-the-art in flow extraction schemes within P4, and we use it to benchmark
the performance of our NetFlow extraction module.
Figure 4 shows the throughput of our proposed NetFlow exporter for different
number of features, side by side with that of FlowStalker [19]. For this comparison we used similar computational resources and both solutions are evaluated
in BMv2 switch. As can be seen, under the similar condition, the throughput of
our solution is about 4 times more than that of FlowStalker [19].

P4-NIDS

FlowStalker

5

7

0.125

Drop of Throughput %

0.100

0.075

0.050

0.025

0.000
0

9

11

Number of NetFlow Fields

Fig. 5. Throughput drop of P4-NIDS and FlowStalker by NetFlow features

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

13

Table 1. Classification performance (F1-score) on different datasets

Solution
Leo-SRAM
Leo-TCAM
Our solution (BMv2)

UNSW-NB15 CIC-2018/2017
F1-score
F1-score
92.00
93.00
93.00
99.00
99.76
98.09

Similarly, Figure 5 shows the drop in throughput due to increasing the number of exported NetFlow fields for both our solution and FlowStalker. As can be
seen, for the equal number of NetFlow fields, our solution shows between 25%
to 50% less throughput drop than those of FlowStalker.
We also evaluated our solution’s classification performance using two
widely recognised NIDS benchmarking datasets: CIC-IDS-2018 [32] and UNSWNB155 [33]. To assess the effectiveness of our DT-based classifier, we compared
its F1-score with that of Leo, a recent solution implementing a similar pretrained DT classifier in P4 for network intrusion detection. Table 1 presents the
F1-scores of our solution alongside Leo’s. Our DT-based classifier demonstrates
significantly better performance on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. For the CIC-IDS
dataset, we used CIC-IDS-2018, an improved version of CIC-IDS-2017 that addresses prior issues. While this comparison isn’t fully equivalent, our results show
that our classifier’s F1-score outperforms Leo’s SRAM-based version and is only
slightly lower than Leo’s TCAM-based implementation.
5.2

P4-compatible Hardware

Experiment Setup Our hardware-based testbed consists of Host H1, Server
S1 and Host H2, as shown in Figure 6.

Host H1
Traffic Generator

Server S1
P4 Switch

Host H2
Traffic Receiver

Dell OptiPlex 7070

Dell PowerEdge R630

Dell OptiPlex 7040

Linux Kernel
Linux Kernel

PktGen
DPDK

Intel-NIC 40G
XL710-QDA2

P4 NIDS

P4
SDK

Netronome
SmartNIC
CX 2x 40GbE

40G QSFP+ Passive Direct Attach Copper Cable

Fig. 6. Hardware experiment setup

Linux Kernel

DPDK

Intel-NIC 40G
XL710-QDA2

14

Yaying Chen et al.

Host H1: a Dell OptiPlex 7070 machine running an Intel Core i7-9700 CPU
with a clock rate of 3.00 GHz, and 24GB RAM (DDR4 2666 MHz). The host
operating system is a Desktop Ubuntu 22.04 (kernel 6.5.0-25-generic). At Host
H1, we enable the Pktgen-DPDK [34] to achieve high-performance traffic replay
and generation.
Server S1: a Dell PowerEdge R630 machine running an Intel Core E5-2630
CPU with a clock rate of 2.40 GHz. The host operating system is a Desktop
Ubuntu 18.04 (kernel 4.15.0-142-generic). A Netronome CX Agilio 2x40GbE
SmartNIC with a deployed firmware containing P4-NIDS program is inserted in
the Server. This host is used to power, flash firmware, and configure the card.
Host H2: a Dell OptiPlex 7040 machine running an Intel Core i7-6700 CPU
with a clock rate of 3.40 GHz, and 15GB RAM. The host operating system is a
Desktop Ubuntu 18.04 (kernel 5.4.0-84-generic). At Host H2, DPDK [35] is used
to receive the traffic and measure the throughput.
Performance Evaluation In order to evaluate the resource utilisation of P4NIDS, we use the same three scenarios explored in the emulated environment for
the performance evaluation namely Basic Port Forwarding, NetFlow Generation
Enabled and DT-based NIDS Enabled. For this purpose, we measured memory
utilisation and throughput drop for each scenario.
For memory utilisation measurement, we ran these scenarios in Program
Studio [36], which is an integrated development environment (IDE) designed
for developing and debugging networking applications on Netronome’s Network
Flow Processors (NFPs) [37]. It offers a graphical interface that aligns with
the standard look and feel of Microsoft Windows, allowing developers to customise their workspace to fit personal workflows and preferences. It generated
the memory usage report providing comprehensive details about memory usage
across various types of memories within the system, as explained below.
– CTM (Cluster Target Memory):
Fast memory is typically used for storing packet data or scratch space during
packet processing.
– IMEM (Instruction Memory):
Memory used to store the program’s instructions. It indicates how much
code is loaded in each memory island.
– EMEM (External Memory):
Memory outside the core processing area, generally used for larger buffers
or data not requiring fast access.
– CLS (CLS Memory):
Memory used by the local packet processor, generally for storing state information during packet processing.
– LM (Local Memory):
Refers to memory used by the micro-engines (ME) in each island.
– EMEM CACHE:
Cache memory for EMEM, used to speed up access to external memory.

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

15

Table 2. Resource utilisation on Netronome SmartNIC (CX 2x40GbE)
Memory Parts

Basic Forwarding P4-NetFlow P4-NIDS
(MB)
(MB)
(MB)
Cluster Target Memory
0.828580
0.828580
0.828580
Instruction Memory
0.783440
0.783440
0.783440
External Memory
965.367812
969.89096 969.89256
Classifier Memory
0.098848
0.147232
0.151552
Local Memory
0.128844
0.184140
0.184140
Cache Memory for EMEM
0.561528
1.118592
1.118592

Table 2 presents the comparison of memory utilisation between the above mentioned three scenarios. As can be seen, CTM and IMEM remain the same across
all scenarios, while in the case of EMEM, CLS, LM and EMEM CACHE Memory
slightly increases in P4-NetFlow and P4-NIDS compared to Basic Forwarding.
Given the minimal memory increase, which remains within the kilobyte range,
these results clearly indicate the lightweight nature of P4-NIDS and its suitability for large-scale network applications.
For the throughput degradation analysis, we used Pktgen-DPDK [34], powered by DPDK, to benchmark the performance metrics. Different bandwidth
limits were applied in Pktgen-DPDK on Host1 to evaluate throughput under
various load conditions. Since our hardware supports a theoretical maximum
bandwidth of 40 Gbps, we expected an output of e.g. 4 Gbps at 10% bandwidth
and 40 Gbps at full capacity. However, as shown in Table 3, the Intel NIC hardware limitations restrict the maximum achievable traffic rate from Pktgen to
about 25.940 Gbps at 100% bandwidth. The throughput for smaller packet sizes
is significantly lower due to the higher number of packets processed by the hardware. For example, while the throughput for a 40 Gbps offered load is 25.819

Table 3. PKT-GEN Bandwidth and Throughput Data
Bandwidth % Offered Load Pkt Size=1024Bytes
Gbits/s
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%

4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40

Pkt Size=64Bytes

Sent Pkt

Throughput

Sent Pkt

Throughput

(MPPS)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.188
3.228
3.243
3.227

(Gbits/s)
4
8
12
16
20
24
25.5
25.824
25.94
25.819

(MPPS)
5.929
7.754
7.755
7.701
7.699
7.793
7.771
7.834
7.791
7.717

(Gbits/s)
4
5.267
5.288
5.289
5.284
5.282
5.286
5.258
5.291
5.302

16

Yaying Chen et al.

9 NetFlow Fields
10 NetFlow Fields
14 NetFlow Fields
19 NetFlow Fields
22 NetFlow Fields
Decision Tree with 22 NetFlow Fields

SmartNIC Throughput (Gbits/s)

25

20

15

10

5

0
4.00

8.00

12.00

16.00

20.00

24.00

25.50

25.82

25.83

25.94

SmartNIC Offered Load (Gbits/s)

Fig. 7. Thoughput Vs. OfferedLoad

Gbps with a 1024-byte packet size, it drops to only 5.302 Gbps with a 64-byte
packet size.
Considering these constraints, we evaluated the throughput of SmartNIC
across five different NetFlow generation scenarios, each with varying feature sets
and DT-based NIDS using 22 NetFlow features, under different offered loads.
The experimental results are presented in Figure 7. The findings show that, in all
scenarios, SmartNIC throughput closely matches the offered load, demonstrating high performance and minimal impact, particularly in the case of P4-NIDS
(i.e., the DT-based classifier). Additionally, for a fixed SmartNIC offered load,
throughput remains nearly constant, regardless of the number of NetFlow fields
or the inclusion of DT-based NIDS.

6

Conclusion

This study addresses the challenge of achieving high-performance and efficient
data-plane implementation for network monitoring and machine learning-based
intrusion detection. Unlike prior solutions that explore alternative approaches,
our proposed method delivers comparable or superior performance to the stateof-the-art, while maintaining minimal computational overhead.
Given the computational constraints of SDN data planes and the programming limitations of P4—such as restricted memory access, limited control flow,
and arithmetic operations [38]—not all machine learning models can be implemented in P4. To address this, we adopted an efficient decision tree-based traffic
classifier previously proposed in the literature and implemented it in P4.

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

17

The results of the evaluation of our solution on a P4-compatible hardware
setup indicate that P4-NIDS achieves high efficiency and performance. It exhibits
minimal memory overhead, remains scalable for large networks, and delivers
stable throughput under varying loads, confirming its viability for real-world
deployment in high-speed networking environments. Our proposed solution for
NetFlow generation and export demonstrates throughput at least four times
higher than the best alternative solution. Moreover, it achieves 25% to 50% less
throughput degradation as the number of exported NetFlow fields increases,
outperforming the current state-of-the-art.
These findings highlight the lightweight nature of our approach, ensuring
it is well-suited for large-scale network applications. Additionally, the decision
tree-based intrusion detection system (P4-NIDS) integrated within the solution
effectively balances computational efficiency with high classification accuracy,
even under demanding traffic conditions.
In conclusion, the proposed solution sets a new benchmark for implementing
network monitoring and intrusion detection within the P4 data plane, addressing
key challenges of computational constraints and scalability. Its superior performance, low overhead, and compatibility with existing hardware make it an ideal
choice for modern high-performance networking environments, paving the way
for more efficient and robust SDN-based security solutions.

References
1. Mariam Kiran, Eric Pouyoul, Anu Mercian, Brian Tierney, Chin Guok, and Inder Monga. Enabling intent to configure scientific networks for high performance
demands. Future Generation Computer Systems, 79:205–214, 2018.
2. Mariam Kiran and Anshuman Chhabra. Understanding flows in high-speed scientific networks: A netflow data study. Future Generation Computer Systems,
94:72–79, 2019.
3. Jonatas Adilson Marques, Marcelo Caggiani Luizelli, Roberto Irajá Tavares da
Costa Filho, and Luciano Paschoal Gaspary. An optimization-based approach for
efficient network monitoring using in-band network telemetry. Journal of Internet
Services and Applications, 10:1–20, 2019.
4. Felix Oberdorf, Myriam Schaschek, Sven Weinzierl, Nikolai Stein, Martin Matzner,
and Christoph M Flath. Predictive end-to-end enterprise process network monitoring. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 65(1):49–64, 2023.
5. Ola Salman, Imad H Elhajj, Ayman Kayssi, and Ali Chehab. A review on machine
learning–based approaches for internet traffic classification. Annals of Telecommunications, 75(11):673–710, 2020.
6. Roy Setiawan, Ramakoteswara Rao Ganga, Priya Velayutham, Kumaravel
Thangavel, Dilip Kumar Sharma, Regin Rajan, Sujatha Krishnamoorthy, and Sudhakar Sengan. Encrypted network traffic classification and resource allocation with
deep learning in software defined network. Wireless Personal Communications,
pages 1–17, 2022.
7. Pat Bosshart, Dan Daly, Glen Gibb, Martin Izzard, Nick McKeown, Jennifer Rexford, Cole Schlesinger, Dan Talayco, Amin Vahdat, George Varghese, et al. P4:
Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 44(3):87–95, 2014.

18

Yaying Chen et al.

8. Frederik Hauser, Marco Häberle, Daniel Merling, Steffen Lindner, Vladimir Gurevich, Florian Zeiger, Reinhard Frank, and Michael Menth. A survey on data plane
programming with p4: Fundamentals, advances, and applied research. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, 212:103561, 2023.
9. Rajdeep Das and Alex C Snoeren. Memory management in activermt: Towards
runtime-programmable switches. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023
Conference, pages 1043–1059, 2023.
10. Diogo Gonçalves, Salvatore Signorello, Fernando MV Ramos, and Muriel
Médard. Random linear network coding on programmable switches. In 2019
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Architectures for Networking and Communications
Systems (ANCS), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
11. Adrian Pekar, Laszlo A Makara, Yuan-Cheng Lai, Ying-Dar Lin, and Winston
Seah. P4tonfv: Offloading from p4 switches to nfv in programmable data planes.
International Journal of Communication Systems, 37(5):e5687, 2024.
12. Bingdong Li, Jeff Springer, George Bebis, and Mehmet Hadi Gunes. A Survey
of Network Flow Applications. Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
36(2):567–581, 2013.
13. Liam Daly Manocchio, Siamak Layeghy, and Marius Portmann. Network Intrusion
Detection System in a Light Bulb. 10 2022.
14. The P4 Language Consortium. The p4 compiler, 2024.
15. Open Networking Foundation. Announcing P4Runtime – A Contribution by the
P4 API Working Group, 2017. Accessed: 2024-11-02.
16. The P4 Language Consortium. P4 16 language specification, 2024.
17. Bingdong Li, Jeff Springer, George Bebis, and Mehmet Hadi Gunes. A Survey
of Network Flow Applications. Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
36(2):567–581, 2013.
18. Cisco Systems. Cisco IOS NetFlow Version 9 Flow-Record Format - White
Paper.
https://www.cisco.com/en/US/technologies/tk648/tk362/technologies
white paper09186a00800a3db9.pdf, 2011.
19. Lucas Castanheira, Ricardo Parizotto, and Alberto E. Schaeffer-Filho. FlowStalker:
Comprehensive Traffic Flow Monitoring on the Data Plane using P4. In ICC 2019 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pages 1–6, 2019.
20. BMv2. Implementing Your Switch Target with BMv2, 1 2017.
21. Habib Mostafaei and Shafi Afridi. P4flow: Monitoring traffic flows with programmable networks. IEEE Communications Letters, 25(11):3546–3550, 2021.
22. Bong-Hwan Oh. P4-based proactive monitoring scheme in software-defined networks. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 2024.
23. Zhaoqi Xiong and Noa Zilberman. Do switches dream of machine learning? toward
in-network classification. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics
in Networks, pages 25–33, 2019.
24. Syed Usman Jafri, Sanjay Rao, Vishal Shrivastav, and Mohit Tawarmalani. Leo:
Online ML-based Traffic Classification at Multi-Terabit Line Rate. 2024.
25. Bruno Missi Xavier, Rafael Silva Guimarães, Giovanni Comarela, and Magnos Martinello. Map4: A pragmatic framework for in-network machine learning traffic classification. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 19(4):4176–
4188, 2022.
26. Mohanad Sarhan, Siamak Layeghy, and Marius Portmann. Evaluating standard
feature sets towards increased generalisability and explainability of ml-based network intrusion detection. Big Data Research, 30:100359, 2022.
27. ETH Zurich NSG. P4-Utils: Extension to Mininet that makes P4 networks easier
to build, run and debug, 9 2021.

P4-NIDS, Intrusion Detection in P4

19

28. Paolini, Emilio and De Marinis, Lorenzo and Scano, Davide and Paolucci,
Francesco. In-Line Any-Depth Deep Neural Networks Using P4 Switches. IEEE
Open Journal of the Communications Society, 5(May):3556–3567, 2024.
29. Bob Lantz, Brandon Heller, and Nick McKeown. A Network in a Laptop: Rapid
Prototyping for Software-Defined Networks. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, pages 1–6, 2010.
30. The P4 Language Consortium. P4 16 language specification, 5 2017.
31. iPerf3: A TCP, UDP, and SCTP network bandwidth measurement tool. https:
//github.com/esnet/iperf. Accessed: 24-05-2024.
32. Iman Sharafaldin, Arash Habibi Lashkari, and Ali A. Ghorbani. Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization. ICISSP
2018 - Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information Systems
Security and Privacy, 2018-January:108–116, 2018.
33. Nour Moustafa and Jill Slay. UNSW-NB15: A Comprehensive Data set for Network Intrusion Detection systems (UNSW-NB15 Network Data Set). In Military
communications and information systems conference (MilCIS) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.,
pages 1–6. IEEE, 2015.
34. Pktgen Project. Pktgen-DPDK: DPDK Based Packet Generator, 2024. Accessed:
2024-11-02.
35. DPDK Project. DPDK: Data Plane Development Kit, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11-02.
36. Netronome Support. Software development - p4c sdk. Accessed: 2024-11-15.
37. Netronome Support. Software development - nfp toolchain. Accessed: 2024-11-15.
38. Zijun Hang, Mei Wen, Yang Shi, and Chunyuan Zhang. Programming protocolindependent packet processors high-level programming (p4hlp): Towards unified
high-level programming for a commodity programmable switch. Electronics,
8(9):958, 2019.

