TRACE: Timely Retrieval and Alignment for Cybersecurity Knowledge
Graph Construction and Expansion
Zijing Xu1 , Ziwei Ning2 , Tiancheng Hu3 , Jianwei Zhuge1 ,
Yangyang Wang1 , Jiahao Cao1 , Mingwei Xu4 *
1
Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua University
2
ZGC Laboratory 3 SCS, Peking University
4
Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
Abstract

represents disparate threat intelligence repositories as a network of triples, enabling efficient pathbased queries for detection and defense. STUCCO
introduced an ontology for CKG construction (Iannacone et al., 2015); UCO (Syed et al., 2016) extended this work by achieving deeper semantic consolidation across diverse datasets; BRON (Hemberg et al., 2024) developed a framework, which
specifically integrates threat, vulnerability, and mitigation knowledge.
Automated techniques for extracting cybersecurity knowledge from unstructured text have become
essential for the continuous evolution of CKGs (Alharbi et al., 2025). APT-specific extraction algorithms that combine deep learning with domain
heuristics help build and maintain dynamic threat
representations in CKGs (Ren et al., 2022). Meanwhile, structured behavior extraction methods have
been applied to convert cyber threat intelligence
(CTI) reports into structured representations of
attack behaviors, enriching technical knowledge
bases (Li et al., 2022).
However, current CKGs exhibit several critical
challenges, particularly given the growing complexity and heterogeneity of modern cybersecurity data
sources:
(1) Lacking high-coverage and generalizability. Existing CKG entity structures are incomplete.
Many current approaches are built upon fixed ontologies that focus on a narrow set of cybersecurity entities and relations. Such designs hinder the
ability to integrate new concepts and adapt to the
growing complexity of cybersecurity knowledge.
These rigid structures fail to align with and absorb
emerging threat intelligence, resulting in limited
scalability, weak generalization, and poor crossdomain interoperability.
(2) Delayed updates hinder real-time applicability. The utility of a CKG depends on timely updates
of entities and relations, as well as efficient entity
alignment. However, many CKGs suffer from la-

arXiv:2602.11211v1 [cs.CR] 11 Feb 2026

The rapid evolution of cyber threats has highlighted significant gaps in security knowledge
integration. Cybersecurity Knowledge Graphs
(CKGs) relying on structured data inherently
exhibit hysteresis, as the timely incorporation
of rapidly evolving unstructured data remains
limited, potentially leading to the omission
of critical insights for risk analysis. To address these limitations, we introduce TRACE,
a framework designed to integrate structured
and unstructured cybersecurity data sources.
TRACE integrates knowledge from 24 structured databases and 3 categories of unstructured
data, including APT reports, papers, and repair
notices. Leveraging Large Language Models
(LLMs), TRACE facilitates efficient entity extraction and alignment, enabling continuous
updates to the CKG. Evaluations demonstrate
that TRACE achieves a 1.8× increase in node
coverage compared to existing CKGs. TRACE
attains the precision of 86.08%, the recall of
76.92%, and the F1 score of 81.24% in entity
extraction, surpassing the best-known LLMbased baselines by 7.8%. Furthermore, our entity alignment methods effectively harmonize
entities with existing knowledge structures, enhancing the integrity and utility of the CKG.
With TRACE, threat hunters and attack analysts
gain real-time, holistic insights into vulnerabilities, attack methods, and defense technologies.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs unify diverse data sources, providing semantic representations across formats and
dimensions (Göpfert et al., 2025). They now serve
as an external context for large language models (LLMs), improving domain-specific reasoning and relevance. In cybersecurity, such knowledge integration is essential for threat hunting,
vulnerability tracking, and automated decisionmaking—capabilities increasingly supported by cybersecurity knowledge graphs (CKGs). A CKG
*

Corresponding author.

1

tency due to delays in source updates and the slow
approval of vulnerability identifiers. Such delays
are particularly critical for high-impact threats like
zero-day vulnerabilities, where outdated or missing
knowledge can result in significant security risks.
To address the challenges mentioned above, we
propose a framework to Timely Retrieval and
Alignment for Cyber security knowledge graph’s
construction and Expansion (TRACE). TRACE
continuously updates and expands the CKG by retrieving entities and relations in diverse cybersecurity data sources, aligning them ontologically,
and constructing new graph segments. TRACE integrates all data from 24 structured data sources
and 3 unstructured data sources, including papers
on attack and defense, advanced persistent threat
(APT) reports, and repair notices.
For the first challenge, we design a novel and
extensible cybersecurity ontology to support the
integration of heterogeneous data sources, particularly diverse types of unstructured information.
Identical nodes from unstructured data sources are
consolidated and merged into the current CKG by
LLMs, and inter-database nodes are appropriately
linked.
For the second challenge, we deploy an automated update module for TRACE. This ensures
that the latest cybersecurity intelligence and related
knowledge are promptly integrated and semantically encoded in the CKG. To ensure semantic coherence across such diverse data sources, alignment
maps extracted entities to existing nodes, enabling
the timely and consistent integration of new knowledge.
We evaluate the coverage of TRACE by comparing it with existing CKGs. Our findings indicate that TRACE contains 1.8× more nodes than
the largest previously known CKG. In addition,
we assess TRACE’s entity extraction performance,
achieving a precision of 86.08%, a recall of 76.92%,
and an F1 score of 81.24%, representing a 7.8%
improvement over the best-known baseline utilizing LLMs. Furthermore, our evaluation of entity
alignment demonstrates that our methods are highly
effective in aligning extracted entities with those in
existing knowledge graphs.
Our contributions are three-fold as follows:

by 1.8× over the previous state of the art.
• We develop an automated approach to extract
entities from unstructured data sources with
LLMs. This method achieves a maximum
F1 score of 81.24%, representing a 7.8% improvement over the baseline.
• We define a generalized cybersecurity ontology and incorporate entity alignment to support continuous and adaptive expansion of
CKG. By accommodating diverse entity types
from structured and unstructured sources, the
ontology enhances graph generalizability.

2

Related Work

2.1

Cybersecurity Ontology

A cybersecurity ontology defines structured representations of entities and relations in the cybersecurity domain. It provides standardized definitions and semantic relationships among various
elements such as assets, threats, vulnerabilities,
attacks, and defensive measures. (Raskin et al.,
2001). MITRE’s modular ontologies support rapid
domain evolution through principles of modularity, clarity, and reusability (Parmelee, 2010; Obrst
et al., 2012).
The multilayered framework typically combines
DOLCE-based upper ontologies with domainspecific ontologies to model foundational cybersecurity knowledge (Oltramari et al., 2014). The
Unified Cybersecurity Ontology (UCO) 1.0 integrated models from standards such as STIX 1.2,
CVE, CCE, CVSS, CAPEC, and CYBOX (Syed
et al., 2016), while UCO 2.0, based on STIX 2.0,
further refined and extended this integration (Pingle et al., 2019). Both versions build upon the
IDS ontology foundation (Pinkston et al., 2003).
In addition, specialized ontologies have been developed for specific tasks such as zero-day attack
detection (Razzaq et al., 2014) and military cyber
operation planning (Chan et al., 2015).
In our work, TRACE integrates and extends
these prior ontologies to establish a high-coverage
and multidimensional cybersecurity ontology structure. This expansion broadens the scope of the
CKG, enabling it to encompass a wider array of
cybersecurity knowledge.

• We propose TRACE, a framework that constructs the largest cybersecurity knowledge
graph to date, unifying 24 structured and 3 unstructured data sources, improving coverage

2.2

Cybersecurity Knowledge Graph

Recent CKG efforts integrate diverse data from
structured and unstructured sources. Several meth2

ods have been proposed that leverage heterogeneous inputs such as CVE, CWE, and CPE, with
a focus on textual descriptions and associated attributes (Jia et al., 2018; Qin and Chow, 2019;
Sun et al., 2020). SecTKG (Sun et al., 2023) is
an automated framework that builds knowledge
graphs from open-source security tools; AISecKG
(Agrawal, 2023) constructed a knowledge graph
for cybersecurity education.
In CKG applications, OpenCTI (Ruohonen et al.,
2024) serves as an open-source platform aiding
organizations in CTI data management based on
CKG. CTINexus (Cheng et al., 2024) automatically
constructs a CTI-centric CKG using LLMs. MalONT2.0 (Christian et al., 2021) constructed a CKG
from Android malware reports using semantic and
syntactic features. Knowledge graph embedding
models have been explored for entity completion in
vulnerability graphs (Høst, 2022), while path-based
methods have been applied to infer new relationships via entity connectivity analysis (Jia et al.,
2018).
Existing CKGs often exhibit limited coverage
and lack timeliness due to the latency in structured
data sources. TRACE addresses these limitations
by aggregating a broad spectrum of data sources
and promptly integrating entities extracted from
the latest unstructured texts, thereby enhancing the
comprehensiveness and timeliness of the CKG.

3

When the subcategory count is minimal, the hierarchical structure is flattened into a single level, with
subtitled labels retained to differentiate subcategories. Conversely, a distinct node type is created
when the subcategory count is substantial. These
new node types inherit the name of the parent structure, and their contents comprise elements drawn
from the original sublevel structure.
Unstructured data comprises textual documents
that may include diagrams or code snippets. We
categorize unstructured data sources into three primary types: APT reports, repair notices, and papers on attack or defense. Based on the focus of
each type, we adopt the MITRE ATT&CK (Strom
et al., 2018) framework and tailor our ontology
schemas accordingly. For instance, an APT report
typically describes how a specific advanced persistent threat leverages targeted techniques to exploit
one or more vulnerabilities against a given system.
So we extract entity types involving "vulnerabilities", "tools", "techniques", "groups", and "assets".
3.1.2 Relation Types
Similarly, the establishment of relations in structured and unstructured data sources needs to be
handled separately. All pre-existing relations in
structured data sources are preserved. Additionally,
newly created sub-level nodes are linked to their
corresponding original data nodes to represent a
"belongs-to" relationship.
Relation types for unstructured data are defined
based on the semantic logic of the source text. Academic papers typically document the utilization
of specific methods or tools in the development
of novel attack techniques, which are deployed
against targeted assets to uncover known or previously unreported vulnerabilities. Finally, they
recommend suitable mitigation strategies, offering
guidance for defenders responsible for remediation.
Consequently, the defined relations involve "discovers", "uses", "causes", "reflects", "mitigates",
and "solves".

System Architecture

The framework of TRACE consists of three key
modules: Information Acquisition, filtering and
validation, entity standardization and alignment, as
depicted in Figure 1.
3.1

Construction of the CKG

In TRACE, the ontology is structured into three
primary dimensions: vulnerability, attack, and defense. Entities extracted from diverse data sources
are categorized under these dimensions, whose
properties are mapped to corresponding subsets
of STIX Domain Objects (SDOs). This alignment
facilitates a comprehensive representation of specialized cybersecurity knowledge domains.

3.2

Collection and Processing

3.2.1 Structured Information Acquisition
The raw content in structured data sources must be
parsed and decomposed before entity extraction, as
shown in lines 3–7 of Algorithm 1.
For structured data sources, we implement an automated pipeline to retrieve, update, and organize
data from each repository. We begin by fetching the
initial files from each source website or database.

3.1.1 Entity Types
To ensure the standardization of the graph, entity
types extracted from structured and unstructured
data sources are processed independently. These
nodes maintain the knowledge types as well as the
hierarchical structure inherent in the data sources.
3

structured data
(CVE、ATT&CK)
……

nodes

.json, .xml
crawl

file parser

Paper

triples
name
desc
……

APT Report
Repair Notice
unstructured data

CKG

……

timely
update

Data Sources

.pdf, .txt
……

id
name
desc
……

entity
alignment

extraction
unaligned nodes

Figure 1: Framework of TRACE

We truncate fields and apply tailored regular expressions to extract the desired properties in each
entity’s JSON document. All property names are
normalized to a unified schema. It is worth mentioning that TRACE records each source’s timestamp and crawls only data newer than the previous
run, which is the basis for automated updates.
TRACE employs a plugin-based architecture to
manage each data source independently. For each
source, TRACE uses Full crawls and Incremental
crawls to acquire data concurrently. Full crawls,
which are executed at longer intervals, systematically retrieve all available content to avoid missing
releases that exceed typical pagination limits; Incremental crawls, which are executed more frequently, poll recent pages for updates to ensure the
CKG reflects the latest data in near real time. After
collection, TRACE applies rigorous validation and
deduplication procedures to all entities and triples,
guaranteeing both completeness and consistency
before integrating them into the graph.

Algorithm 1: Collection and Processing
Data: U is a list of unstructured texts
{u1 , u2 , . . . , un }; KG: knowledge
graph; N , T P : nodes, triples in KG;
θ, δ for similarity, time interval
threshold; timec , timel for current,
last timestamp
Result: Updated N and triples T P
1 N, T P ← ∅; S ← ∅; i, j, m ← 0
2 while timec − timel = δ do
3
//Structured Acquisition
while Ei .timestamp ≤ timec do
4
Ns = GetN odemongoDB (Ei )
5
T Ps = GetT riplesmongoDB (Ei )
6
i = i + 1;
7

8
9
10
11
12

13
14
15
16

17

18
19
20
21

//Unstructured Acquisition
foreach uj ∈ U do
if uj ∈
/ paper then
S = S ∪ {uj };

3.2.2 Unstructured Information Acquisition
For unstructured data sources, the data preprocessing pipeline begins with format conversion and
cleansing, followed by a preliminary screening process to validate the presence of required content
within each document. The filtered texts are sent
to the LLM for detailed knowledge extraction, as
shown in lines 8-17 of Algorithm 1.
APT reports and repair notices are sourced from
annual disclosures and periodic product updates,
ensuring that essential entities and triples are available. Since only a subset of offensive and defensive papers contains extractable cybersecurity insights, we first apply an LLM–based binary classifier on each paper’s title and abstract to distinguish
relevant from irrelevant texts. Only those papers
deemed relevant proceed to the subsequent knowledge extraction stage.

else
if uj .security = true then
S = S ∪ {uj };
foreach sk ∈ S do
Nu = GetN odeLLM (sk );
T Pu = GetT riplesLLM (sk );
//Filtering and Validation
Nu = {n ∈ Nu | n ̸= ∅};
//Entity Standardization and Alignment
EntityAlignment(Nu , T Pu );
N = N ∪ Ns ∪ Nu ;
T P = T P ∪ T P s ∪ T Pu ;
KG = KG ∪ getkg(N, T P );
timel = timec ;

4

The information acquisition has a two-step strategy: first, extract candidate nodes from each document; second, combine the nodes based on the
predefined relationship schema. The combination
is then submitted back to the LLM to validate the
existence of each relation in the source text.
We leverage few-shot learning with RetrievalAugmented Generation (RAG) and target regularization to maximize node extraction accuracy. By
our prompt-engineering framework, each node category and triple pattern is defined systematically
and illustrated with examples. For nodes with standardized formats, such as CVE identifiers, we apply regex matching for direct extraction. For attributes exhibiting contextual semantic variability,
we maintain a curated retrieval repository of previously extracted nodes and triples, which serves as
a reference database for LLMs.
Before generating entity extraction results
through prompts that provide formal definitions
and task-specific exemplars, LLM uses the repository to retrieve relevant information, thereby enhancing the model’s comprehension of contextual
requirements. This structured guidance enables
LLM to generate extraction results in standardized
formats while maintaining lightweight computational requirements with high efficiency.
3.2.3

"description". These differences need to be standardized. Additionally, every node must contain a
"source" parameter, preventing confusion caused
by nodes with the same name or type across different data sources. To support update tracking and
deduplication, all nodes must include a timestamp
parameter to record the exact collection time. This
timestamp is continuously refreshed as TRACE executes its tasks, ensuring the graph always reflects
the most recent collection.
As shown in lines 23-27 of Algorithm 1, to prevent information redundancy between newly extracted entities and existing ones in the graph, these
extracted entities from unstructured data sources
must undergo entity alignment with their corresponding counterparts of identical types. We encode textual descriptions of the target node and its
graph-based counterparts into vector embeddings,
then select the top 20 candidate entities using similarity metrics. If the highest similarity is lower
than the value of θ we set, we consider it to be a
new node and update it to the graph; if there exists
at least one similarity higher than θ, put them into
the LLM for judgment to obtain the node with the
highest similarity. Each node extracted needs to
be aligned with the same type of node in the original graph. All edges originating from or pointing
to the target node must be migrated to its highestsimilarity counterpart through edge redirection.

Filtering and Validation

Characters that cause graph anomalies need to be
replaced or deleted, such as "\\" and "–". The generated nodes without any other associations are
considered Isolated Nodes. The names of some
Isolated Nodes only contain serial numbers without valid information. These nodes will be filtered
to reduce incoherence in the knowledge graph, as
shown in line 22 of Algorithm 1.
3.2.4

4

Implementation

To construct the CKG, TRACE integrates data from
a total of 27 sources, comprising 24 structured and
3 unstructured datasets. The structured data sources
encompass four primary categories: vulnerability
databases, vulnerability exploitation platforms, attack technique frameworks, and cybersecurity community platforms. For unstructured data sources,
we selected 10,205 papers, 869 APT reports, and
6,784 repair notices published in the last decade.

Entity Standardization and Alignment

To ensure the correct incremental update of the
graph, all data must be standardized into a consistent format. This involves organizing the content
of each node, ensuring uniformity across all nodes
while also preserving the uniqueness of nodes from
different data sources. To reduce hallucinations in
subsequent LLMs, it is crucial to maintain consistent node formatting, including ID prefixes, property names, and other standardized elements. All
nodes must include several common parameters to
ensure consistency across the graph. Taking vulnerability dimension for instance, one data source
may use a parameter "desc", while another may use

We systematically aggregated multi-dimensional
corpora through diverse approaches according to
the ontology structure we proposed, subsequently
organizing them into structured nodes and triples.
We employed MongoDB as the storage database,
utilizing multiple built-in data types to accommodate various data formats. The nodes and triples extracted were subsequently integrated into the graph
through alignment and merging to enhance its academic relevance.
5

5

all
4,741,428

Experiments

In this section, we focus on answering the following three research questions (RQs):

Isolated Node
124,866

One-Edge Node
2,197,241

F1（%）

Table 2: The number of different kinds of nodes.

• RQ1: How comprehensive is the coverage of
the CKG constructed by TRACE, and to what
extent are its nodes interconnected?

100

OpenAI o1

DeepSeek-R1

Claude 3.7

90
80
70
60
50

• RQ2: How effective are TRACE’s entity extraction and alignment regarding accuracy and
completeness?

40
30
20
10
0

tech
discovers vuln

• RQ3: How do cybersecurity researchers and
analysts leverage TRACE in practical case
studies to validate its utility in real-world
threat investigation?
5.1

vuln
used_by
groups

defend_tech
target asset

In contrast, Super Nodes represent highly interconnected entities with dense edge connections.
We investigated the Super Nodes with the most
edges in the entire graph. For instance, CWE-79
has 32,396 edges associated with it, making it the
node with the most edges in the entire graph. CWE79 refers to Improper Neutralization of Input During Web Page Generation, or Cross-site Scripting.
As the first of the 2024 CWE Top 25, the wide relevance of CWE-79 directly reflects its core position
in the real threat ecosystem, and to a certain extent,
reflects the connection between the vulnerability
dimension and itself and other dimensions.

5.1.1 Coverage of CKG
As for now, TRACE has successfully established
4,741,428 nodes and 24,980,064 edges in the current knowledge graph, which consists of 56 node
types and 112 edge types.
We compare the number of nodes and edges in
the CKG with those in the largest known structured
and unstructured cybersecurity knowledge graphs,
BRON (Hemberg et al., 2024) and CSKG4APT
(Ren et al., 2022), as shown in Table 1. Our analysis revealed that ours contains 1.82× more nodes
and 1.79× more edges than the previously largest
CKG. Additionally, its node types and edge types
represent 4.67× and 11.2× increases, respectively.
These findings underscore the superior coverage of
TRACE in representing cybersecurity knowledge.

5.1.3 Triple Association Density Analysis
Table 3 presents the qualitative statistical data
of nodes and triples in the current graph. The
observed-to-expected ratios of edges associated
with the "vuln" entity are significantly lower than
anticipated. This discrepancy arises because entities linked to "vuln" exhibit uniqueness in their
structural definitions. For instance:
vuln affect version: The "version" entities are
decomposed from parent entities and thus predominantly correlate only with their parent entities.
vuln has_cvss score: "Scores" derived from
CVSS vary substantially across vulnerabilities due
to differences in attack vectors, impact scope, and
exploit conditions.
The “E/P” values of most triples exceed 0.8, indicating that the CKG has strong connectivity.

5.1.2 Node Association Density Analysis
Table 2 illustrates the nodes’ connection density.
Isolated Nodes (nodes without any edges) accounting for 2.63% of all nodes in the CKG. These nodes
remain disconnected due to their failure to align
with existing entities in the graph. Child nodes frequently evolve into One-Edge Nodes (nodes with
only one edge, comprising 46.34% of total nodes)
that exclusively associate with their parent entities.
As elaborated in Relation Types, a substantial proportion of child nodes directly contributes to generating most of the One-Edge Nodes.

BRON
CSKG4APT
Our CKG

vuln
vuln
tech
causes assets mitigated_by targets assets
mitigation

Figure 2: F1-score comparison of triple extraction in
unstructured data sources across LLMs.

RQ1: Coverage and Connectedness

nodes
500,000
2,608,327
4,741,428

tech
uses tool

edges
5,060,000
13,935,201
24,980,064

5.2

RQ2: Entity Extraction And Alignment

5.2.1 Entity Extraction
We randomly selected 200 texts each from APT
reports, papers, and repair notices to evaluate entity

Table 1: The number of nodes and edges in CKGs.

6

Relationship
analytics consist implementations
vuln affect version
vuln has_cvss score
vuln belong_to cwe
cpe belong_to infras
sensor map data_model
vuln exploited_by exp
defend_technique counter technique
cwe used_by attack_pattern
group uses technique

#Src
109
1,569,668
1,569,668
1,569,668
118,061
7
1,569,668
182
1,430
181

#Dst
271
1,127,590
1,012,354
1,430
5
862
236,572
1,043
615
1,043

#Edges
29,539
1.77E+12
1.59E+12
2.24E+09
590,305
6,034
3.71E+12
189,826
879,450
188,783

Edges
19,271
6,929,355
992,279
220,013
14,943
5,758
32,784
646
737,649
154,267

E/P
6.52E-01
5.61E-07
6.24E-07
9.80E-05
2.53E-02
9.54E-01
8.83E-08
3.40E-03
8.39E-01
8.17E-01

Table 3: Triples Density, Relationship is the name of the triples collections, #Src is the number of nodes in the type
of start entity, #Dst is the number of nodes in the type of end entity. #Edges is the number of edges that should exist,
Edges is the unique number of edges, EP is the ratio of Edges and #Edges.

GPT-NER
Cp-NER
ProML
CyberNER-FT
Our Method

Mapaper

Mipaper

MaAP T report MiAP T report MarepairnoticeMirepairnotice

68.36%
62.54%
66.18%
67.64%
73.57%

68.12%
62.48%
67.89%
66.72%
73.25%

69.51%
63.72%
70.34%
67.45%
73.01%

68.45%
63.96%
69.02%
67.11%
76.80%

69.60%
64.44%
73.44%
70.84%
81.24%

68.18%
63.89%
68.51%
66.39%
80.87%

Table 4: Comparison of entity extraction in unstructured data sources, Matype and Mitype is the F 1macro and
F 1micro of the current type of unstructured data sources respectively.

extraction. Performance was assessed using macroand micro-average F1-scores. The macro-average
F1 is the mean of F1-scores computed separately
for each entity type, while the micro-average F1
is the mean obtained by considering all entity instances across different text genres. Equations 1
and 2 present the respective calculation methods.
n

1X
F 1macro =
n
i=1



2 · T Pi
2 · T P i + F P i + F Ni

bining few-shot learning with an RAG framework,
our method leverages both small-sample learning
and retrieval-based techniques to achieve superior
entity extraction performance.
We randomly select 20 texts from each of the
three text types, which means 60 texts in total, and
arrange the entities extracted into combinations according to the predefined triple types. We then
apply holdout cross-validation to implement binary
judgment of triples. The dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio, with
the three LLMs that achieved the best binary classification performance in the paper used for triple
judgment. To ensure fair comparison across models
and mitigate the influence of stochastic variation,
we conducted each experiment three times using
fixed random seeds across all models. The final extraction for each model was obtained by taking the
union across the three runs. The results are shown
in the Figure 2. Finally, we use the best-performing
model to classify the remaining relations, obtaining the list of entities and triples extracted from the
unstructured data sources.


(1)

P
2 ni=1 T Pi
P
F 1micro =
2 i=1 T Pi + ni=1 (F Pi + F Ni )
(2)
We selected four state-of-the-art NER models:
GPT-NER(Wang et al., 2023), Cp-NER(Chen et al.,
2023), ProML(Chen et al., 2022), CyberNERFT(Srivastava et al., 2023). We compared the experimental results of the various methods on both
the macro-average and micro-average, as shown in
Table 4. Because APT reports and repair notices
tend to exhibit greater structural regularity and often contain publicly enumerated identifiers that are
easier to extract, all five methods achieve higher
scores on these genres than on papers. By comPn

5.2.2

Entity Alignment

We regularly update and maintain the graph’s
global list of entities and triples. For each new en7

tity extracted from unstructured data, we locate all
entities of the same type in the list and compute the
semantic similarity of their "description" attributes
using sentence-transformers, which can capture
contextual information and long-distance dependencies, and thus offer more accurate semanticsimilarity measures. After fine-tuning, we set the
similarity threshold θ to 0.9. Only nodes whose
similarity exceeds θ are passed to the next stage.
We then apply zero-shot prompting to identify the
final matching node, replacing the original node’s
properties in the extracted list with those of the
matched node. Finally, we merge the revised entities and triples back into the existing global list.
We randomly choose 50 instances for each of
the six entity types and ask our expert team to
judge how many of those matchings are correct,
the results are shown in Figure 4. We find that the
F1-score for vuln entities is the highest because
vuln identifiers follow well-defined formats that
can be captured by regular expressions. If two descriptions share the same ID, they match directly
without semantic textual similarity. By contrast,
group entities have the lowest F1-score. We find
that many groups operate covertly and employ a
wide variety of attack strategies, so their descriptions are highly diverse, making entity alignment
for group entities especially difficult.
5.3

these map respectively to CAR-2021-02-002 (Get
System Elevation) and D3-PLA (Process Lineage
Analysis) successively. When tracing an actual intrusion path, a single node in the graph may spawn
multiple branches, allowing analysts to navigate
and drill down to the precise threat intelligence
required.
5.3.2 The importance of Unstructured Data
During our experiments, we observed that numerous entities extracted from unstructured data
sources could not be matched to existing nodes in
the CKG. This discrepancy arises because such information has not yet been incorporated into structured data sources. For instance, the OrpaCrab
backdoor, detailed in a November 2024 APT report
(orp, 2025), employs the MQTT protocol for command and control, utilizes AES encryption to obfuscate its configuration, and leverages DNS over
HTTPS to resolve its C2 domain, thereby evading
traditional DNS monitoring. This malware was
identified in a Gasboy fuel management system
and was named "OrpaCrab" within that specific
report. Consequently, in the CKG, it exists as a
One-Edge Node associated with the group, lacking
broader integration. Similarly, several vulnerabilities have been disclosed in recent papers, with authors indicating that they have reported these issues
to relevant organizations. However, these vulnerabilities have yet to receive official identifiers. Such
entities are critical for risk analysis, as attackers
may exploit these vulnerabilities before they are
patched. Therefore, extracting entities from unstructured data sources and aligning them within
the CKG is essential for timely and comprehensive
threat assessment.

RQ3: Case Study

We employ TRACE as the role of the attack analysts to illustrate how it bridges structured and
unstructured data sources.
5.3.1

Connectivity between Entities

As shown in Figure 3, TRACE identifies the ProxyLogon vulnerability in Microsoft Exchange (CVE2021-26855), which permits attackers to bypass
authentication and assume administrator privileges
(Khang and Abd Rahman, 2021). Analysis of
APT reports attributes this exploit to the Hafnium
group (Lechtik et al., 2021), known in ATT&CK as
APT41. Subsequently, other threat actors such as
ToddyCat (TG-3390) have also targeted this vulnerability. Within the ATT&CK framework, APT41’s
attack sequence includes technique T1190 (Exploit Public-Facing Application), detected by data
source DS0015 (events collected by third-party services such as mail servers or web applications),
and technique T1548 (Abuse Elevation Control
Mechanism), for which M1051 is recommended
as mitigation. In our defensive knowledge bases,

6

Conclusion

We introduce TRACE, a framework with a multidimensional cybersecurity ontology structure to enhance the construction and expansion of the CKG.
TRACE integrates 24 structured data sources and 3
categories of unstructured data sources, constructing a CKG that encompasses 56 distinct node types
and 112 edge types. By leveraging LLMs for efficient entity extraction and alignment, TRACE
enhances the CKG’s completeness and timeliness,
providing a unified and dynamic view of cybersecurity information for security analysts and researchers with the latest knowledge. In the future,
we plan to continuously expand the ontology structure, aiming to develop a more unified model of
8

Asset:
ShadowPad
target

Analytics:
2021-02-002

Defend_technique:
D3-PLA

mitigated_by

Mitigation: M1051

cover

Vuln: CVE-2021-26855

Technique:
Remote code
execution

maps

maps
Technique: T1548

used_by

mitigated_by

used

maps

Mitigation:
Remote code
execution

Group: Hafnium

Intrusion-set: APT41

mitigated_by Data Sources:
DS0015
detected_by
Technique: T1190

Figure 3: A sample of attack analysis using TRACE

rebalance training samples to mitigate these
effects.

defend_technique
group
asset

• Although we have implemented entity extraction, images in texts often contain critical information (e.g., exploit diagrams, technical
schematics) that remains unexploited. We
plan to adopt multimodal vision–language pretraining to tightly align visual and textual representations, enabling accurate interpretation
of non-textual content in future work.

mitigation
vuln
technique
0

20

40

60

80

100

F1
Claude 3.7

DeepSeek-R1

OpenAI o1

Figure 4: F1-score comparison of entity alignment in
unstructured data sources across LLMs.

cybersecurity knowledge.

Limitations

References

There are several limitations that we would like to
address in future work.

2025.
OrpaCrab:
A backdoor Trojan that
abuses the MQTT protocol to target ORPAK
devices. https://www.freebuf.com/articles/
paper/416421.html.

• TRACE integrates data from 24 structured
data sources and 3 types of unstructured data
sources, yielding a CKG with over four million nodes. Nevertheless, a non-negligible proportion of isolated nodes remains, revealing
unlinked entities within the cybersecurity domain. We will continually expand TRACE’s
data sources to drive further graph growth and
improve its connectivity and application effectiveness.

Garima Agrawal. 2023. Aiseckg: Knowledge graph
dataset for cybersecurity education. AAAI-MAKE
2023: Challenges Requiring the Combination of Machine Learning 2023.
Hatoon Alharbi, Ali Hur, Hasan Alkahtani, and Hafiz Farooq Ahmad. 2025. Enhancing cybersecurity through
autonomous knowledge graph construction by integrating heterogeneous data sources. PeerJ Computer
Science, 11:e2768.
Peter Chan, Jacques Theron, Renier Van Heerden, and
Louise Leenen. 2015. An ontological knowledge
base for cyber network attack planning. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Cyber
Warfare and Security, Kruger National Park, South
Africa, pages 69–77.

• We leverage LLMs augmented with RAG for
entity extraction from unstructured sources.
We find that hallucinations in LLM outputs
remain unavoidable, leading to errors such as
misclassifying “tool” entities as “technique”.
These misclassifications are due to ambiguous
class boundaries and unbalanced training data
distributions. Future work will refine prompt
definitions, broaden few-shot examples, and

Xiang Chen, Lei Li, Shuofei Qiao, Ningyu Zhang,
Chuanqi Tan, Yong Jiang, Fei Huang, and Huajun
Chen. 2023. One model for all domains: Collaborative domain-prefix tuning for cross-domain ner.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.10410.

9

Yanru Chen, Yanan Zheng, and Zhilin Yang. 2022.
Prompt-based metric learning for few-shot ner. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.04337.

Mary C Parmelee. 2010. Toward an ontology architecture for cyber-security standards. STIDS, 713:116–
123.

Yutong Cheng, Osama Bajaber, Saimon Amanuel
Tsegai, Dawn Song, and Peng Gao. 2024. Ctinexus:
Automatic cyber threat intelligence knowledge graph
construction using large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.21060.

Aditya Pingle, Aritran Piplai, Sudip Mittal, Anupam
Joshi, James Holt, and Richard Zak. 2019. Relext:
Relation extraction using deep learning approaches
for cybersecurity knowledge graph improvement. In
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining, pages 879–886.

Ryan Christian, Sharmishtha Dutta, Youngja Park, and
Nidhi Rastogi. 2021. An ontology-driven knowledge
graph for android malware. In Proceedings of the
2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pages 2435–2437.

John Pinkston, Anupam Joshi, Tim Finin, and 1 others. 2003. A target-centric ontology for intrusion
detection. In Workshop on Ontologies in Distributed
Systems, held at The 18th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.

Christoph Göpfert, Sheeba Samuel, and Martin Gaedke.
2025. A method for integrating heterogeneous data
into a knowledge graph. In International Conference on Information Integration and Web Intelligence,
pages 277–282. Springer.

Shengzhi Qin and KP Chow. 2019. Automatic analysis and reasoning based on vulnerability knowledge
graph. In International Conference on Cyberspace
Data and Intelligence, pages 3–19. Springer.

Erik Hemberg, Matthew J Turner, Nick Rutar, and UnaMay O’reilly. 2024. Enhancements to threat, vulnerability, and mitigation knowledge for cyber analytics,
hunting, and simulations. Digital Threats: Research
and Practice, 5(1):1–33.

Victor Raskin, Christian F Hempelmann, Katrina E
Triezenberg, and Sergei Nirenburg. 2001. Ontology
in information security: a useful theoretical foundation and methodological tool. In Proceedings of the
2001 workshop on New security paradigms, pages
53–59.

Anders Mølmen Høst. 2022. Constructing a vulnerability knowledge graph. Master’s thesis, Norwegian
University of Life Sciences, Ås.

Abdul Razzaq, Zahid Anwar, H Farooq Ahmad, Khalid
Latif, and Faisal Munir. 2014. Ontology for attack
detection: An intelligent approach to web application
security. computers & security, 45:124–146.

Michael Iannacone, Shawn Bohn, Grant Nakamura,
John Gerth, Kelly Huffer, Robert Bridges, Erik Ferragut, and John Goodall. 2015. Developing an ontology for cyber security knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 10th annual cyber and information
security research conference, pages 1–4.

Yitong Ren, Yanjun Xiao, Yinghai Zhou, Zhiyong
Zhang, and Zhihong Tian. 2022. Cskg4apt: A cybersecurity knowledge graph for advanced persistent
threat organization attribution. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(6):5695–5709.

Yan Jia, Yulu Qi, Huaijun Shang, Rong Jiang, and Aiping Li. 2018. A practical approach to constructing
a knowledge graph for cybersecurity. Engineering,
4(1):53–60.

Sami Ruohonen, Alexey Kirichenko, Dmitriy Komashinskiy, and Mariam Pogosova. 2024. Instrumenting opencti with a capability for attack attribution support. Forensic Sciences, 4(1):12–23.

Tan Yock Khang and Nor Azlina Abd Rahman. 2021.
Botnet as a service towards national defense and security. In 2021 14th International Conference on Developments in eSystems Engineering (DeSE), pages
86–91. IEEE.

Smita Srivastava, Biswajit Paul, and Deepa Gupta. 2023.
Study of word embeddings for enhanced cyber security named entity recognition. Procedia Computer
Science, 218:449–460.

M Lechtik, A Kayal, P Rascagneres, and V Berdnikov.
2021. Ghostemperor: From proxylogon to kernel
mode. kaspersky lab.

Blake E Strom, Andy Applebaum, Doug P Miller,
Kathryn C Nickels, Adam G Pennington, and Cody B
Thomas. 2018. Mitre att&ck: Design and philosophy.
In Technical report. The MITRE Corporation.

Zhenyuan Li, Jun Zeng, Yan Chen, and Zhenkai Liang.
2022. Attackg: Constructing technique knowledge
graph from cyber threat intelligence reports. In European Symposium on Research in Computer Security,
pages 589–609. Springer.

Siqi Sun, Cheng Huang, Tiejun Wu, and Yi Shen. 2023.
Sectkg: A knowledge graph for open-source security
tools. International Journal of Intelligent Systems,
2023(1):4464974.

Leo Obrst, Penny Chase, and Richard Markeloff. 2012.
Developing an ontology of the cyber security domain.
In STIDS, pages 49–56.

Yizhen Sun, Dandan Lin, Hong Song, Minjia Yan, and
Linjing Cao. 2020. A method to construct vulnerability knowledge graph based on heterogeneous data.
In 2020 16th International Conference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN), pages 740–745.
IEEE.

Alessandro Oltramari, Lorrie Faith Cranor, Robert J
Walls, and Patrick D McDaniel. 2014. Building an
ontology of cyber security. STIDS, 2014:54–61.

10

Zareen Syed, Ankur Padia, M Lisa Mathews, Tim Finin,
Anupam Joshi, and 1 others. 2016. Uco: A unified
cybersecurity ontology. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence for Cyber Security, pages 195–202.
Shuhe Wang, Xiaofei Sun, Xiaoya Li, Rongbin Ouyang,
Fei Wu, Tianwei Zhang, Jiwei Li, and Guoyin Wang.
2023. Gpt-ner: Named entity recognition via large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10428.

11

